Episode Transcript
Interviewer: Four ways to naturally boost testosterone. Dr. Jim Hotaling is a urologist and a men's health expert. What can I do?
Dr. Hotaling: Simple things you can do are work on losing weight. Even a 10- to 15-pound weight loss can make a big difference. Also, exercise, particularly anaerobic exercise, such as lifting weights. Eating a balanced diet, trying to avoid processed foods, particularly sugar. That can result in changing energy levels and also mess with the natural circadian rhythms that reflect your testosterone production. And the other big thing is sleep. A lot of men have sleep apnea and that can make a big difference in their natural testosterone production. Testosterone levels are a reflection of your overall health. And if you work on making these changes, you should notice a significant difference in two to three months.
updated: April 23, 2021
originally published: May 30, 2019There's more to low testosterone than a sluggish sex drive.
Sure, it's one of the more frustrating symptoms. But it's not the only reason you might be looking to boost your testosterone levels.
Low testosterone (or Low T) is also associated with:
- Erectile dysfunction
- Fatigue
- Reduced muscle mass
- Increased body fat
- Feeling irritable, or even depressed
- Changes in sleep habits
It's completely natural for testosterone levels to decrease over time. In fact, almost half of men over the age of 80 have low testosterone. But younger men can be troubled with symptoms of low testosterone, too — especially those who are overweight or have certain underlying health conditions, like diabetes and sleep apnea.
And while there are treatments for low testosterone, many men prefer to start by making the healthy lifestyle changes that can naturally improve their testosterone levels.
If you're looking for all-natural ways to boost your testosterone levels, here are some tips:
1. Improve your diet
Adopting and maintaining a healthy diet benefits your testosterone levels in two primary ways:
- Promotes weight loss and a healthy weight
- Reduces the chance of blood sugar spikes
Men who are obese are much more likely to have low levels of testosterone. Excess abdominal fat, in particular, is likely a major culprit. Having more of this type of fat is thought to result in a higher production of the enzyme called aromatase, which converts testosterone into estradiol — lowering a man's free testosterone levels. For this reason, losing weight may improve testosterone levels, and a healthy diet can help you achieve that.
A healthy diet includes plenty of vegetables and fruits, whole-grain carbohydrates, moderate amounts of healthy fats and lean protein, such as chicken and fish.
The key to a healthy diet when trying to elevate your testosterone levels is avoiding refined, simple carbohydrates, like the ones found in chips and other junk food. These simple carbs can lead to spikes in your blood sugar and have been shown to reduce free testosterone levels.
2. Mix cardio with strength training, and vice versa
First thing's first: Exercise in general can help you lose weight and/or maintain a healthy weight. And now we know that excessive weight can contribute to low testosterone levels. So, if you're not already exercising, starting a workout regimen focused on losing weight may help boost your levels.
But why make time for both cardio and strength training?
Cardio is a great way to burn a lot of calories, while the muscle built from strength training can help boost your overall metabolism so that you're burning calories even when you're not exercising. Plus, both types of exercise — strength training, especially — can help you rebuild some of the muscle mass you might have lost as a result of low testosterone.
Whether you're new to exercise or just getting back into it, know that everyone's fitness level varies and the best way for you to burn calories may look different than the guy on the treadmill next to you. Cardio can be a long run, but it can also be walking at a brisk pace.
And, if you're new to strength training, don't be intimidated. Try starting with body weight exercises, which are movements that rely on your own body weight to help build total body strength — no gym membership needed.
We lead busy lives, and it's easy to treat exercise as an afterthought. Either we don't consistently make time for it in the first place, or we find a specific type of exercise we enjoy and put it on repeat. But making time both cardio and strength training in your weekly workout routine gives you your best shot at boosting your testosterone levels.
3. Get plenty of sleep
It's a tale as old as time. Sleep matters. Yes, guys, you need your beauty rest, too.
Getting an adequate amount of sleep every night is important for maintaining overall good health, which likely promotes sufficient testosterone levels in general. But it's actually more than that.
Most testosterone release happens while you're sleeping, meaning that sleep has a direct effect on your testosterone levels. Data show that getting less than eight hours of sleep can reduce a man's testosterone levels by as much as 15% the next day.
So, while 4 to 5 hours of sleep may seem like enough to get you through the day, it could be contributing to lower levels of testosterone.
4. Take steps to reduce stress
Like sleep, stress affects your entire well-being — including your testosterone levels.
When you experience stress, your body releases a hormone called cortisol. This hormone helps your body prepare and respond to this stress, and then your body goes back to normal. But when you're stressed more often than not (chronic stress), you experience prolonged exposure to cortisol — and studies show that cortisol circulating in the bloodstream reduces the level of free testosterone.
And while life is always going to be stressful, you can take steps to reduce stress you may be feeling.
One of the best ways to relieve stress is to take time for yourself and do something you enjoy — even if it's only for a few minutes every day. It could also mean actually acting upon those deep-breathing reminders that your smartwatch keeps bugging you about. Just something to get you to slow down, be present and relax your mind and body.
And if you're stress is stemming from your low testosterone level itself, seeing your doctor might help.
5. Address any underlying medical conditions
Something many may don't realize is that low testosterone is rarely a phenomenon on its own. It's often linked to — and potentially even caused by — one or more underlying health condition that a man may not even know he has.
We've already discussed that obesity can contribute to low testosterone, but so can other common health conditions, including:
- Type 2 diabetes
- Obstructive sleep apnea
- Metabolic syndrome
Low testosterone can also be caused by medications you might be taking for a health condition you already know about or a previous therapy you've received, like chemotherapy and radiation.
Seeing and being evaluated by a doctor who specializes in men's health can help you understand what might be causing your low testosterone.
In addition, your doctor can help you understand which of the lifestyle changes above might be most important for you, recommend testosterone treatment and/or refer you to specialists who can help treat any underlying health condition that might be contributing to your low testosterone levels.
If you're having issues related to low testosterone, such as weight gain and difficulty exercising due to fatigue or muscle loss, starting testosterone treatment can make your weight loss goals and lifestyle improvements much easier to achieve.By Mike Kocsis | 7 minutes read | Last updated: May 28, 2025
Medically Reviewed by Dr. George Touliatos
There are several benefits to TRT, it can play a crucial role in the body, influencing various functions such as muscle mass development, bone density maintenance, sexual function and energy levels. Some men are deficient in testosterone making it hard for their bodies to carry out everyday processes. Testosterone Replacement Therapy (TRT) is a great way to bring your testosterone levels back up to a normal range.
In this article, we outline 6 benefits of TRT you can take advantage of when starting TRT.
What are 6 Benefits of TRT?
Testosterone therapy is increasingly recognised as a transformative treatment for men experiencing low testosterone levels. While it’s a treatment often associated with restoring hormone balance, the impact of TRT extends beyond just the physical. Have a look at how TRT can enhance your well-being and quality of life.
1) Improved Body Composition and Strength
Many studies state that Testosterone serves as a key player in enhancing body composition and strength. Its anabolic properties contribute to the development of lean body mass while simultaneously decreasing fat mass. This hormone plays a pivotal role in sculpting a more muscular physique and promoting optimal body composition. Additionally, testosterone has been linked to increased strength, providing the necessary foundation for improved physical performance. Regular exercise, combined with the influence of testosterone, synergistically contributes to a more robust and resilient body.
2) Improved Cognition
The Oxford Dictionary defines cognition as “The mental action or process of acquiring knowledge and understanding through thought, experience, and the senses.” This process can include memory, judgment and decision-making. It appears that testosterone can have a dramatic effect on cognition.
In one study, healthy men aged 50 to 90 years were given exogenous testosterone alone or in combination with an aromatase inhibitor (AI). Spatial memory was improved in both groups, whereas verbal memory only improved in the men receiving testosterone without an AI.
This suggests that estradiol also plays an important part in cognition. Estradiol is created via the aromatisation process, which requires testosterone. So whichever way you cut it, testosterone is vital to cognition.
3) Increased Libido
Testosterone is a crucial factor in influencing libido and the number one cause of low sex-drive in men. In males, testosterone is primarily produced in the testes, and its levels are linked to the intensity of libido. Low testosterone is associated with a decreased sex drive and poor erectile function. In contrast, one of the benefits of testosterone therapy is its ability to increase libido and improve erectile function.
In one single-blind, placebo-controlled study, 31 normal men were given 200mg of intramuscular testosterone enanthate for 8 weeks, or an injectable placebo for 4 weeks then 200mg of testosterone enanthate for the remaining 4 weeks. The researchers observed an increase in sexual arousal.
4) More energy
Fatigue and lethargy are two of the most classic low testosterone symptoms. Conversely, maintaining optimal testosterone levels can enhance your daily energy levels. Testosterone achieves this by improving insulin sensitivity, aiding in body fat loss, enhancing physical stamina via an increased red blood cell count, and motivating exercise through dopamine signaling pathways. This sets in motion a positive feedback loop where improved physical well-being corresponds to elevated energy levels.
5) Improved Sleep
Optimal testosterone levels contribute significantly to promoting healthy sleep patterns. Research suggests that testosterone plays a vital role in regulating the sleep-wake cycle and overall sleep quality. Adequate levels of this hormone are associated with improved deep sleep stages, enhancing the restorative aspects of rest. Testosterone also influences the production of melatonin, a key hormone involved in sleep regulation. Moreover, individuals with balanced T-levels often report fewer sleep disturbances and better overall sleep efficiency.
One study looked at sleep duration in 531 Asian males between the ages of 29-72. The researchers noted that sleep declined with age, and age determined sleep quality and concentrations of sex hormones. They found a positive association between serum testosterone levels and sleep duration in men. This was independent of age, aerobic exercise and body fat.
6) Improved Heart Health
Many worry that testosterone replacement therapy could cause heart disease. However, low testosterone is actually associated with an increased risk of heart disease.
Testosterone therapy benefits include improved blood markers of triglycerides, cholesterol and heart health.
In a review of over 30 studies on testosterone therapy, doctors from the Mayo Clinic found no increase in cardiovascular disease among men who received testosterone. They found that testosterone, if anything had a protective and beneficial effect on the heart that has “not yet been widely appreciated.”
Is testosterone therapy safe?
TRT is consider safe and an effective treatment for men with low testosterone levels, but like any medical intervention, it carries certain risks.
One of the potential concerns is the possibility of an increased risk of prostate cancer, although current research offers mixed conclusions on this link. Other risks include an enlarged prostate, which can lead to urinary problems, and an elevated risk of developing blood clots, which can pose serious health threats. Additionally, TRT can sometimes cause fluid retention and an imbalance in red blood cell counts. it can also worsen lower urinary tract symptoms and sleep apnea.
Testosterone replacement therapy (TRT) can suppress follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) and luteinizing hormone (LH) production causing decreased sperm production and fertility. Luckily there are medications such as hCG that you can take alongside TRT to counteract it’s effects.
Despite these risks, many men experience significant benefits from TRT when it is closely monitored by a healthcare provider.
Improving testosterone deficiency naturally
Boosting testosterone levels naturally involves making certain lifestyle changes that can positively impact your body’s hormone production. Boosting T-levels naturally can be achieved through a few key lifestyle changes:
- Physical fitness: Engage in regular strength training and high-intensity interval training (HIIT).
- Balanced Diet: Ensure a diet rich in essential nutrients, especially zinc and vitamin D.
- Adequate Sleep: Prioritize quality sleep, as poor sleep can lower testosterone.
- Stress Management: Practice relaxation techniques like meditation to reduce stress and prevent cortisol from negatively impacting testosterone.
Please note that making lifestyle changes will only provide a boost to your hormone levels. If you have particularly low testosterone levels, taking a more intensive approach like TRT is recommended. Find out if your T-levels are too low with a Balance My Hormones blood test, delivered right to your front door in discrete packaging!
Book Free Consultation
Final Thought
To conclude, testosterone supplementation has an array of positive impacts on both physical and mental well-being. From enhanced muscle mass and strength to improved mood, cognition, and energy levels, TRT is a valuable tool in addressing the effects of low testosterone and bringing you to a normal testosterone level. While acknowledging the potential benefits, it’s crucial to approach TRT under the guidance of healthcare professionals.
Here at Balance My Hormones we are a bespoke TRT clinic that addresses your individual health needs. If you’re wondering whether your testosterone levels are low or simply would like to enquire about TRT, don’t hesitate to get in contact by clicking the button above.
Evidence Based Research
This article has been researched and written based on scientific evidence and fact sheets that have then been crossed checked by our team of doctors and subject matter experts.
References, sources and studies used alongside our own in-house research have been cited below, most of which contain external clickable links to reviewed scientific paper that contain date stamped evidence.
Our team of healthcare experts and GMC registered doctors are licensed to UK GMC standards. We strive to provide you with the latest evidence based, researched articles that are unbiased, honest and provide you with accurate insights, statistics and helpful information on the discussed topic to ensure you gain a better understanding of the subject. You can read more about our Editorial Process by clicking here.
We value your feedback on our articles, if you have a well-researched paper you would like to share with us please contact us.
Quick Low Testosterone Test
If you know your total testosterone reading from a previous blood test input the results to the left above to see if your testosterone levels are normal.
Low Testosterone Levels
You may have low testosterone depending on the symptoms you have, please contact us to find out how we can help.
Please Retry
The Total Testosterone Level You Entered Is Incorrect. Figure Must be in nmol/L you can use our converter here.
Normal Testosterone Levels
Your testosterone levels appear to be in the normal range.
LOOKING GOOD!
You must be over 38, have had your ovaries removed or have suffered with premature menopause to warrant further hormone tests.
Further investigation needed
Please contact us to discuss your hormones, we need your total testosterone levels to validate your hormone deficiency. You can order a blood test here.
Low Testosterone Levels
You may have low testosterone depending on the symptoms you have, please contact us to find out how we can help.
High Testosterone Levels
You appear to have higher than normal testosterone levels, please contact us for further investigation.
Normal Testosterone Levels
You appear to have normal testosterone levels. Contact us if you have any concerns.Episode Transcript
This content was originally created for audio. Some elements such as tone, sound effects, and music can be hard to translate to text. As such, the following is a summary of the episode and has been edited for clarity. For the full experience, we encourage you to subscribe and listen— it's more fun that way.
The Path to Intuitive Eating
Maintaining a healthy diet today seems nearly impossible. The built environment of modern day America makes it so easy to eat poorly. 100 years ago we had to work to get food and spend energy to get energy. Today there's no limit on the foods we can eat, and it's a little too easy to indulge in our built in biological drive to consume high fat and high sugar foods.
Dr. Alex Pastuszak has worked hard to become an "intuitive eater." He's practiced for years to get a good understanding of how much food and the types of food his body needs to stay healthy. He even finds himself looking forward to eating food that makes him feel good like a salad for lunch.
His secret is to make sure that he's never on a "diet." Diets are short term and focused on getting a person to lose weight or gain muscle. These quick-fix approaches to look better don't necessarily lead to good dietary habits. Dr Pastuszak urges people to focus on their health and forming good eating habits that can last a lifetime, rather than a fad diet that will help you lose a couple pounds for just a couple months.
Scot is working towards getting to a place where he can eat intuitively. He watches his diet closely and still weighs out his food. He hates weighing his food all the time, but is teaching himself what portion sizes should look like and how much he should be eating. He looks forward to the day he can stop weighing his food and eat intuitively.
Is Testosterone Therapy Right for You?
You may have seen the ads about testosterone therapy or "T" treatments. They make it sound like testosterone can cure just about anything that ails you. Have low energy? Testosterone is the answer. Putting on a few pounds of fat? Get T. Having trouble sleeping? Testosterone will help you sleep like a baby.
"In the right person, testosterone can help a lot," says men's health specialist Dr. Alex Pastuszak, but he admits that it isn't the cure-all the advertisements lead you to believe. Most of Dr. Pastuszak's patients will come in with complaints of low sex drive and general fatigue. They can't seem to power through a day and find themselves tired by lunch time.
The difficulty with diagnosing low-testosterone is that the symptoms are extremely non-specific. For example, if a guy is feeling fatigue, it can be caused by just about anything- lack of sleep, poor diet, depression, etc. Same goes for symptoms like low sex drive and insomnia.
The only way to know if a man is experiencing the symptoms of low testosterone is to get a testosterone level test.
What is a Normal Range for Testosterone?
A testosterone level test measures the amount of male hormones in the bloodstream. The results are measured in nanograms per deciliter. A healthy range for a guy is 300 to 1000 ng/dl, with around 600 being average. Anything around or below 300 is considered low by most physicians.
According to Dr. Pastuszak, most men feel better with a level of 600 or higher. Any man with a level below 600 will likely feel better with testosterone therapy and it's worth trying out. It's important to remember that testosterone therapy is typically considered a "lifestyle therapy" meaning you can use the treatment as long as you'd like if it helps you feel better.
Having a low testosterone level between 300 to 400 isn't dangerous to you health. However, if a man's testosterone drops below 300, there is an increased risk for osteoporosis and cardiovascular issues.
What Kind of Testosterone Therapy is Available?
Testosterone therapy can be administered in several different ways depending on the patient's needs, wants, and expectations.
The very first question Dr. Pastuszak asks is whether or not a guy plans on having kids in the near future. It may come as a surprise, but testosterone does not improve a guys fertility. In fact, testosterone does the exact opposite. After six months to a year of taking testosterone, most men see a dramatic drop in fertility.
Testosterone therapy is often made up of several different medications:
Testosterone
The basic form of the treatment is to add more of the male hormone to the body. This can be through injections, creams, pills, or even injections under the skin. These hormones aim to raise a man's testosterone levels to a more typical range.
Human chorionic gonadotropin or hCG
hCG is a drug that helps to stimulate the testes to produce testosterone naturally. It is prescribed with testosterone to prevent the testicles from shrinking during treatment. If testosterone is taken by itself, it interrupts the connection between the brain and testicles. The testes will stop producing testosterone and over time will begin to shrink. In some cases, the testicles will shrivel up to the size of raisins. hCG helps keep them the right size during testosterone therapy.
Clomid
Clomid is an oral medication that stimulates the brain and testes to make more testosterone. Clomid has less of an impact on fertility, but is less effective at raising testosterone levels as significantly as T creams and gels. It is often prescribed to men with slightly low levels of testosterone or men looking to have children.
There are many different testosterone treatments available. Work with your doctor to find out what type of therapy will work best for your situation
The Side Effects of Testosterone Therapy
Like any medication, testosterone therapy comes with its own set of potential side effects. The two major side effects are infertility and testicular shrinkage. Infertility can be avoided by taking a less intense treatment route like Clomid. Testicle shrinkage is prevented with hCG and should always be taken with testosterone.
Testosterone therapy can also lead to an elevated level of estrogen. It may be confusing that increasing a male hormone would also increase a female hormone. Biochemically, testosterone is a precursor compound to estrogen. The human body needs testosterone to create estrogen. Therefore, in some men, having too much testosterone can lead to the overproduction of estrogen. If a guy's estrogen levels are too high they can develop tender, sensitive nipples, and in extreme cases, begin to develop breasts.
Additionally, testosterone can lead to erythrocytosis, or a significant increase in red blood cells in the blood. If a person's red blood count gets too high it can increase cardiovascular conditions like heart attack and stroke.
If you're on any sort hormone management like testosterone therapy, it's important to maintain regular follow up care. The hormones can keep you feeling really good for a really long time, but it's important to keep tabs on how they're affecting your body with a professional. After first starting testosterone therapy, your doctor may insist on frequent visits and tests to track your treatment and adjust medication as needed. After you and your doctor get the treatments zoned in, you can expect to visit your doctor every 6 months or so to make sure everything is running smoothly.
Choosing to Stop Testosterone: Scot's Story
Scot has had his own experience with testosterone therapy. After not feeling his best for a while, he went to a doctor to test his testosterone levels. The results showed that while he was within the acceptable range, his testosterone levels were on the lower end of the range. His doctor prescribed him a testosterone cream that he rubbed on his chest. After using the cream for a while, he didn't feel like he was feeling better. For him, the testosterone didn't turn out to be the cure-all he had been led to believe. He stopped the treatment and started focusing on other aspects of his health.
Scot recognized that his lack of energy may have been caused by something other than low testosterone. At the time, he was only getting around five hours of sleep a night. He says he was a little overweight and wasn't exercising as frequently as he should. Those bad habits were probably the real cause of his low energy levels, and he felt that testosterone couldn't cure his lifestyle.
After focusing on improving those aspects of his health, Scot began feeling better. Even better than he did when he was on testosterone therapy.
Dr. Pastuszak agrees that testosterone therapy isn't the cure for everything that the commercials will lead you to believe, but for some guys, it can get them on the right track. For example, an overweight thirty year old with low testosterone levels may be suffering from extremely low energy. That low energy leads him to not exercise or eat as well as he should. He comes in. Get tested and finds out he has low testosterone. The low testosterone level may likely be caused by the extra weight and lack of exercise, but with how low his energy levels are, it's going to be hard to be active.
Dr. Pastuszak would put this guy on hormone therapy as a "lifestyle intervention." The treatment makes him feel better and improves his energy levels. He then has the energy to go to the gym and exercise, which will bring his weight down, and get his body producing testosterone again. In a case like this, testosterone therapy can break the bad health spiral long enough for a man to improve his health and eventually stop using testosterone.
Testosterone therapy is a deeply personal and complicated issue. If you have any questions about treatments or suspect you may have low testosterone, submit your questions to Dr. Pastuszak by email at hello@thescoperadio.com.
ER or Not: Food Poisoning
You've decided to eaIf you've had food poisoning, you know how terrible it can be. You've eaten somewhere that's not so great and now you can't seem to stop throwing up. Should you go to the emergency room?
According to Troy, you don't necessarily need to go to the ER for food poisoning. Food poisoning usually strikes six to twelve hours after eating contaminated food, and will last for about just as long. Over the counter anti-nausea medication can help with the symptoms, but it'll have to run its course before you feel better.
However, if you are vomiting incessantly and can't keep even liquids down, you run the risk of becoming severely dehydrated. In this situation, go to the ER. An emergency room will be able to put you on an IV drip and help keep you hydrated during the food poisoning. Most urgent care facilities lack the means to start an IV, so if you're at risk for severe dehydration, an emergency room will be your best bet for treatment.
Just Going to Leave This Here
On this episode's Just Going to Leave This Here, Scot is thinking about the critters in his gut and how the microbiome could help your immune system stay strong and Troy is not ready for winter.
Talk to Us
If you have any questions, comments, or thoughts, email us at hello@thescoperadio.com.Episode Transcript
This content was originally created for audio. Some elements such as tone, sound effects, and music can be hard to translate to text. As such, the following is a summary of the episode and has been edited for clarity. For the full experience, we encourage you to subscribe and listen— it's more fun that way.
Scot: So will testosterone solve all my problems as a man? That's today on "Who Cares About Men's Health," providing information, inspiration, and a different interpretation about men in men's health. He brings the MD to the show. Ladies and gentlemen, Dr. Troy Madsen.
Troy: Yeah. Ready to talk about testosterone. I am curious, very curious. Where do we go with this? What do we do?
Scot: Offsetting the MD, I bring the BS. My name is Scot Singpiel. And Mitch, he's responsible for bringing the microphones. Welcome, Mitch.
Mitch: Hello. Hi.
Scot: I think Mitch needs some testosterone. You know how low key he is.
Mitch: It's low T day. I mean, based on everything I see on the internet, that's got to be what's going on.
Scot: Well, yeah. I mean, you go to the internet . . . I'm going to do my impersonation of the internet. You ready for this?
Mitch: I love it.
Scot: All right. You're, like, "You have low energy? You've got to get some T. You putting on a few pounds of fat? You've got to get some T. You having trouble sleeping? You've got to get some T." That's my impersonation of the internet. It's the answer to everything.
Troy: It is. It cures everything.
Scot: Yeah. So we're going to find out if that is actually true or not with Dr. John Smith.
So, Dr. Smith, what is the common complaint you get when somebody comes to you and they're interested in testosterone treatments? What problem are they trying to solve? What are they trying to cure? All the things I talked about? Something else?
Dr. Smith: Absolutely. I mean, I think the thing about testosterone is the symptoms are so wide-reaching -- fatigue, cognition, erectile issues. They've heard on the internet, or they've talked to a friend who's on testosterone, and they're like, "Man, it just changed my life. It fixed everything." Which in some people's cases that may be true, but for most people, it definitely can play a role in helping them out, but I don't think it's the cure-all that you're talking about, that the internet shows. It's not making Frank Thomas who he is today.
Scot: And that's dangerous, right? Because you can get testosterone without even having a face-to-face conversation with a doctor, right? You can essentially just order it online. Is that true or is that overstated?
Dr. Smith: I think some of the newer companies you've got out there that are making things available . . . hopefully you're getting at least a video conferencing going over your medical history with someone who's a medical provider, whether it be a nurse practitioner, a PA. Hopefully you're talking with a physician. If they're not doing it that way, they're doing it wrong.
But testosterone is one of those things where it can be very helpful. I have quite a few patients that are on it, and I think it is one of those things that can definitely benefit people. But the extent that it benefits them kind of varies between patients.
Scot: Testosterone, I get the impression that it's probably not a do-it-yourself sort of a thing. It's not something you want to, as a layperson, just dive into on your own. Why is that?
Dr. Smith: Well, there are certain . . . everything has a risk and a benefit, and testosterone is no different. For people who have low testosterone, replacing it can really make a difference. It can give you that increased boost of energy, help you with weight loss, help you with metabolism, help with sleep. It can help with erections. I mean, it can help with cognition in people who have low testosterone. However, it's not necessarily the thing that's going to fix all those problems.
And oftentimes I'll go through people's history and say, "Hey, man, your testosterone is normal. Adding more to the mix isn't likely to fix things. We should look at other issues." And so I think really just taking that deep dive and seeing if it's something that is right for you is important.
Troy: I guess, John, I've seen all this stuff Scot mentioned, you see all these things on the internet, you see TV ads, etc. Yeah, I think I wonder myself, "Man, is my testosterone low? Should I be worried about this?" At what point do you tell people, "You should get your testosterone level checked"?
Dr. Smith: I think if you've looked at some of the other . . . if you've talked to your primary doctor and kind of gone over things, the usual suspects of a thyroid issue or vitamin deficiencies, things like that that they check a lot, if those are all normal, I think it's completely reasonable to look at it.
Some people say, "Oh, well, my dad had low testosterone and I got it checked in my 30s." But if you look at the facts of the matter, about 40% of people over the age of 45 have a testosterone level of 300 or less. And so that's a decent amount of the population that's out there. And so I think if you have an interest in it, it's okay to ask to have it checked because it's better to know and to at least know what your options are where it may be a benefit to you.
Scot: And how do you do that, then?
Dr. Smith: So your regular doctor can check it. You can make an appointment with a men's health specialist like we have at the University of Utah. We have a men's health group with multiple different providers. We have nurse practitioners, PAs, and multiple MDs and DOs that can take care of your needs as far as checking the hormones. But that's the first thing that we do.
And hormones, ideally, should be checked before 10:30 in the morning because our bodies spike testosterone between the early hours of the morning. Usually people will say between 4:00 a.m. and 10:00 a.m. in the morning. And so we want to check it to see what your body is actually doing.
If you're low in the morning, the odds are that you're high in the afternoon are going to be really slim to zero because your body spikes it in the morning to give you that boost of the hormones that you need to get you through the day.
Scot: And when you take a look at that test, it's a range, right? So a man gets the test done and you've got some numbers and there's a range. And what does that tell you? Let's pretend I'm at the low end of the range, but I'm still considered normal. Is that somebody that you would suggest testosterone therapy for?
Dr. Smith: I think a lot of it is the discussion that you have with the patient. So the range is huge too. If you look at the range, most labs are between 300 and 1,000. Some are a little less, some are a little more, but just for intents and purposes of this discussion, about 300 to 1,000.
So let's say, Scot, you're at 350. Well, what does that mean? Insurance requirements say that we've got to get two tests that show a low value before 10:30 in the morning. So let's say we've done that. You come in, your first one was 350, your second one was 340 or 338. What do we do from there? Well, then we have a discussion.
And I think in a lot of those folks, it is reasonable to discuss therapy. People outside the normal range, it's obviously okay to discuss that as well, but people tend to feel better in a range around 400 to 700. Sometimes, some people will say 600 or higher. There's a lot of different variability out there between who you talk to about it.
But again, if you're feeling the symptoms of fatigue, decreased libido, decreased erectile quality, some of those things are really hitting you hard, and you're like, "I'd love to try testosterone to see if it would help some of those symptoms," I think it's completely reasonable to do that.
Mitch: But insurance won't cover it unless you are beneath that range?
Dr. Smith: Not necessarily. Insurance wants to see that you're in the low. Really, I think it's reasonable for anybody that's 350, 400, and below. You can talk to them about testosterone replacement therapy. And if there's benefit there, insurance usually won't balk at it. And if they do, and it is helping you, cash pay for this stuff is not obscene.
Mitch: I'll just disclose. Now, I had my testosterone levels checked after we did a previous episode, and my number is right around 400. And my primary care provider is like, "Oh, no, you don't need to. We don't need to. There's no need to talk about testosterone therapy." And so I've kind of put it in the back of my mind.
But then at the same time, you have the weird people on the internet that they say you need to be 600 or 1,000 or above to be healthy. And it's just like if I'm right there, I'm at the 400, maybe it would be helpful. What would you say to someone in my situation?
Dr. Smith: I think you've got to look at the whole picture, but I think it's definitely something that you could consider. Again, most primary care doctors don't do a lot of hormone replacement, so they're going to say, "Hey, you're well within normal range. We're not going to touch it. We're not going to do anything," because that's their comfort zone.
This is the thing that I do every single day where I get people sent from their primary care doctor to talk about this stuff. And I think it's an in-depth conversation of, "Hey, let's look at the whole picture. Is there anything else going on that's a problem, or could be seen as a problem? Do you have a thyroid issue? What is your BMI? How does your weight look? What's your exercise routine?" and things like that, because those things can be done before supplementing testosterone.
And there are some interesting numbers out there with diet and exercise. If people will lose weight of 10 pounds or so, you can increase your testosterone by 100 points by losing 25 pounds and getting diet and exercise.
But a lot of times, it's hard to get the motivation to go do diet and exercise when you're overweight and you're really lethargic. And so it's like, "Would testosterone help me get there?" and a lot of those things as well.
And so again, exercise 15 minutes a day for 6 months of moderate intensity exercise will increase your testosterone by 22 points. And then if you're exercising for 30 to 40 minutes a day, you'll increase it by 50 to 60 points. And so again, there are things you can do other than testosterone if you're kind of in that range, and any of those things fit.
Now, Mitch, I know you're super fit, so that doesn't really . . .
Mitch: Yeah, I'm the fittest guy.
Dr. Smith: . . . matter for you. But if those are things that you can do, those are modifiable things you can do in your life to increase your testosterone naturally.
Mitch: Got you.
Troy: You mentioned diet also, John. I mean, it sounded like we're talking more about weight loss here, but are there any kind of dietary changes in terms of foods you're eating or foods you can eat or even supplements that would increase your testosterone levels without actually having to go for any sort of hormone replacement therapy?
Scot: Raw eggs and meat, right?
Dr. Smith: Right. Exactly.
Troy: Well, sure. Yeah.
Dr. Smith: You've seen Gascon in "Beauty and the Beast." That's how he got so huge.
Troy: Exactly.
Dr. Smith: There are no real big things that are out there that are known to necessarily just be super beneficial, other than eating as clean as you can.
Testosterone is a hormone and hormones are built on a backbone of cholesterol, so they're kind of fat. They're built on fat. And so when you have excess fat tissue, sometimes the hormones like to hang out there because they don't love water. And so you'll find that people may have a higher testosterone level when they lose that body weight, because now they don't have as much body fat and that testosterone is able to kind of circulate. Plus, you're in better health and your body is able to just do what it does better.
Troy: Speaking of our concerns . . . obviously, Mitch has thought about it. I've thought about it. I know, Scot, you've told us before you've had your testosterone level checked. I think a lot of men wonder about this, and I think we get concerned and we say, "Hey, maybe I don't have a lot of energy," whatever it might be. Of those who come in to get tested, what percent really have low testosterone?
Dr. Smith: I mean, my practice is kind of skewed, because by the time a lot of these guys get to me, they've already had it checked with their primary doctor who's not going to treat them unless they're outside of the normal range. And then when they are, they get referred to our office. A lot of primary care doctors don't love treating testosterone patients and they know that that's kind of what we do.
And so I get a skewed percentage. Most of the people who come in and are looking for testosterone have already kind of been pre-screened, so they are low. I would say a vast majority, at least three-quarters of the people that I see, already have testosterone levels that come back and are low and they're there to talk about therapy as a referral from their primary doctor.
Troy: Interesting. Yeah, I just wondered if it's one of these things that it's just something else for us to worry about. And if a lot of us are getting tested and it's a small percentage, or maybe it is, like you said, over 45% . . . I think you mentioned 45% of men have levels under 300. So maybe more of us should be getting tested at some point and we're just not getting tested.
Dr. Smith: Yeah. It's around 40% over the age of 45, you'll see low testosterone levels. And again, it's one of those things where you tend to hit that middle age, people tend to not necessarily be as active, and things like that as well. So there are a lot of things that go into it.
But if we're looking at the actual testosterone itself . . . Let's say you come in, you're low or you're low normal, and you want to try testosterone. There are a lot of things you need to have a discussion with the patients about. Are you interested in having children in the future or any more children if you already have children? What are your goals as far as that goes?
There are multiple different ways to treat testosterone these days or to treat low testosterone, I should say. And kind of having that full disclosure discussion with the patient goes a long way, because there are multiple different modalities of treating it from oral medications to topical medications, to injections, to long-term injectables, to subcutaneous pellets. I mean, there's a myriad of different treatment options that we can discuss.
Scot: And of your patients that you start on therapy, you mentioned that the symptoms can be very broad and caused by a lot of different things. Maybe you're not getting enough sleep. Maybe you've got too much stress in your life. That's why you're low energy. Maybe you're not eating the right foods or exercising. That's why you don't feel good. How many after they get testosterone that come in that have low testosterone actually go, "Yeah, that made a difference," versus, "I'm about the same"?
Dr. Smith: Majority of them. But that also varies via the root that they get testosterone. So I'll talk kind of a little bit about each modality. Oral options is . . . there's a medication called Clomid. A lot of people know it as a fertility medication. Women use it for fertility purposes. But what the medication does is it stimulates your body to produce more testosterone and more sperm. This is a very gradual improvement in testosterone. And a lot of times people don't feel that robust boom, that jolt of energy and things, because it's kind of a low-key slow rise of the testosterone back into the normal range. They don't have that big boost.
And most of the time, when people have that boost, it's from the injection because they're injecting a bolus of testosterone that then is being absorbed into the body and they have their levels shoot outside the normal range. So they feel like Superman. It gives them that rush of testosterone, which you don't get with topicals, the lotions, and you don't get with the oral because it's doing what your body normally did before you didn't create enough testosterone. And so you don't get those super highs that you would have before.
So a lot of patients know, "Oh, man, I do have more energy. I do feel good." The ones who do injections tend to come back and have more of a, "Man, that's great. This stuff is great," because they get that boom, that rush, that spike of testosterone very quickly.
Troy: And then how long until that wears off?
Dr. Smith: So usually people inject on a weekly basis, sometimes every other week, depending on their injection tolerance. And I do have a few patients who inject multiple times per week of low doses because they don't like that roller coaster effect. You do really get a high of testosterone and then it kind of fades out over the course until you do your next injection.
And so that's what they notice. They're like, "Man, I just get this high, and I feel it for about two to three days, and then it kind of wears down and I feel pretty good. And then when I do my next injection, I get that high again." I see that a lot more frequently with people who inject testosterone rather than take oral medications or do topical gels.
Scot: And what about side effects or downsides to testosterone therapy?
Dr. Smith: Man, it's almost like you wrote a script for that or something.
Troy: Talked about the good stuff. Let's talk about the bad stuff.
Dr. Smith: I'm going to make you feel like Superman. And now I'm going to tell you the downside.
Scot: Kryptonite is no good for you.
Dr. Smith: Exactly. You really have to monitor things with testosterone. So testosterone can cause an increase in red blood cell mass, and that in and of itself isn't necessarily a bad thing as long as it doesn't get outside of the normal range too far. That puts you at an increased risk of a cardiovascular event, like a heart attack or stroke.
Now, those incidents are rare, but it's something that we definitely keep an eye on. And that's a reason why we follow these folks with labs regardless of the type of replacement that we do.
Other things that we follow is your estrogen levels can rise because testosterone is a precursor to estrogen. There is a molecule called aromatase that actually converts testosterone to estrogen. Their chemical formula is very, very similar.
Your body likes to keep a ratio of about 10-to-1 testosterone to estrogen, and so the higher your testosterone goes, the higher your estrogen level goes.
And some people will develop breast sensitivity, nipple tenderness, or breast growth from elevated estrogen if their bodies are over-converting to estrogen. And so we watch that closely because that can be bothersome to folks.
And then a couple of the other things, we always monitor PSA in folks that are over the age of 40, or at least I do in my practice because . . . There's not an increased risk of prostate cancer, but if you were to develop prostate cancer, testosterone would feed the prostate cancer.
It's kind of like if you have a match and it's lit, nothing happens. But if you have a match and you pour a gasoline on it, you have a problem on your hands. And so the prostate cancer would represent the match and the testosterone would represent the gasoline. It would help it to kind of progress faster in a way.
And those are the things that we really kind of keep an eye on, especially people with family history or people who have had prostate cancer that we're treating with testosterone, which yes, we do that quite frequently.
Troy: So now that we've talked about the risks of taking the testosterone supplement, let's just say someone is like, "Okay, I've had my testosterone level checked. It's low. I don't want to assume those risks." What's the downside of that?
Dr. Smith: So the downside is you can develop osteoporosis with time. There are some studies that . . . initially some studies came out with testosterone that said testosterone supplementation caused cardiovascular issues, and now it's become the opposite. That's been debunked, and there is some literature out there, I don't know that it's super robust, that said low testosterone can increase your risk of cardiovascular events. So those are the big things of not having enough.
Long term, it's really difficult to assess a lot of those risks, but those are the risks. if you were to just have low testosterone.
Scot: Do you have anybody ever come in that you just are like, "No, it's not a good idea for you"?
Dr. Smith: Yeah. I mean, people who come in with a testosterone level of 600 from their primary care doctor. It's a bad idea.
Scot: Yeah. But I mean low testosterone. Is there ever a time where it's just like, "No, probably not. The risks are too big"?
Dr. Smith: So I think the one thing that I didn't get to with the risks is testosterone replacement will cause sterilization. It will stop you from being able to have children. When you supplement testosterone . . . not all methods of supplementation will hurt fertility, but injections will. Anything that's injectable topical or the long-term injectables or pellets all will cause sterility to a point. And so those things are things that you've got to have those conversations.
So if someone comes into my office and they have low testosterone and they don't want to take the pill like Clomid and they're like, "I just want to do injections, but I still want to have kids in six months," I would say, "Let's hold off until you're done having kids or until your wife gets pregnant, or go donate some sperm so that you can have children if that's your goal, before we start therapy."
Scot: Mitch, given the information that you just got today, are you going to go in? You're going to get some T?
Mitch: I don't know. I'm in a place where I think that after this conversation, I would like to go talk to a men's health specialist, especially if there is a hesitation from primary care physicians to just be like, "Oh, you're in the normal range. You're good." There is a curiosity there. There is an interest there, knowing where I'm sitting at on the levels, if they think it would be something that could help with some of the situations that I'm dealing with right now.
Scot: I guess I'm afraid that it just sounds like another pill. I don't mean that as I don't want to take drugs. I just mean we're all looking for the quick fix, right? So yeah, maybe I'm a little tired. Would I like to lose some fat? Sure. Would I like to have a little bit more muscle mass? Yeah. If I'm in that normal range and on the low end, I don't know. It just feels like I'm expecting too much. I'm going in for the wrong reasons. Does that make sense to anybody?
Dr. Smith: And I don't think you can necessarily . . . I mean, again, I'm not trying to sell testosterone here. I just think that . . .
Scot: No, that's not the point of this. We're just trying to get some information, for sure.
Dr. Smith: Right. But I think that if you want to feel your best and be able to do your thing to the healthiest you can be, I don't think it's a bad thing to come in with the desire to be healthier, to feel better, to have more energy. Again, when you start testosterone therapy, you do have a change in lean muscle mass by about five kilograms switch over from body fat to lean muscle.
Scot: Hold on a second. Hey, Siri, convert five kilograms to pounds.
Dr. Smith: Right. Exactly.
Troy: That's a lot of pounds.
Dr. Smith: It's 2.2 pounds per kilogram.
Scot: It's 11 pounds there. All right.
Dr. Smith: Actually, I said that incorrectly. It's five pounds of fat or two and a half kilograms. My apologies.
Troy: That's still a lot.
Dr. Smith: But still, a five-pound change in your body mass, it can be substantial. It can really help. And again, those are just the numbers that we have from the literature that's out there. And so it can be beneficial.
I don't think there's a wrong reason to come in to look for it. Most patients aren't coming in to be like, "Hey, man, I saw this magazine with this guy Schwarzenegger on it and he was pretty big. I kind of want to get there. Can you help me?" Those aren't the patients that I see.
People come in, they're like, "I'm really fatigued. I feel tired at night. My libido is down. I want to feel better. And I want to see if testosterone may be helpful in that regard." And they're not looking necessarily as a magic bullet or trying to use it as a substance of abuse where they can go and just change their whole body composition. But I think it is very beneficial for a lot of people.
Scot: Troy, where do you stand on it?
Troy: As we talk about this, I just feel like there are so many other things I need to address. That's way down the list. We talk about energy and everything there. I feel like, wow, I'm still trying to figure out how to sleep and those kinds of things. So I'm kind of hung up on that still. We've talked about this and if we talk about it today, I am still kind of curious about it, but I don't think I will be getting tested any time soon. I'll say that.
Scot: I noticed a parallel from another show that we did. You're talking about using testosterone treatments to kind of get over that hump, right? Let's say that you would like to exercise more, but you don't have the energy and you do find you do have a low testosterone. That was almost kind of like using medication for mental health. If you're having challenges with your mental health, it can be really hard to become motivated to exercise or eat well, or maybe you don't even sleep well. So you can take medications for a short period of time until you kind of get those things working. We talk about that Core Four, how they all interact with each other. And then possibly come off of it. Am I understanding that correctly?
Dr. Smith: Yeah. And I think if that's your plan, you've got to look at a way to keep the testicles producing while you do that. If you went to an injectable or a topical testosterone that's going to shut down the body's production . . .
So let me nerd out a little bit with the physiology of this. Your body has these precursor hormones called FSH and LH. And those are the two hormones. They are in both men and women. In women, they regulate the menstrual cycle, and in men, they stimulate the testicles to make testosterone and sperm.
And when you give testosterone, it's a negative feedback loop. And so your body sees there's enough testosterone in the bloodstream and stops sending FSH and LH to stimulate the testicles. And so you've got to do something to keep those testicles producing if you're going to be on testosterone in the short term. That's where other drugs come in.
There's an injectable called HCG that we use to help stimulate. It's an LH analog, meaning it's not LH, but it will stimulate the LH receptor on the testicle. And it will continue to have the testicle continue to produce at a lower level, even though you're giving yourself exogenous testosterone.
And then if you decide to come off after six months or a year or whatever, after you've gotten in shape and you've gotten that motivation, then you don't have this complete drop-off of testosterone where your body has to start making it again where it hasn't for the last year.
Scot: But it would. If you're using a topical solution that's telling your body then not to produce more testosterone, does that mean you're dedicated to that for the rest of your life?
Dr. Smith: You can. Now, you can come off of it. And the thing I tell people is if your body was already not producing enough and you haven't done a darn thing to change that, your body is not likely going to go back to producing more than it was before you started the drug. But then there's always that kind of window where your body has to catch up and it's not producing hardly anything at all and you just feel like garbage.
Troy: But it would come back over time?
Dr. Smith: Yes. And that's the part where the HCG comes in to help it, where you don't have as big of a drop-off. Scot: All right. So now I need to ask the question that I think everybody is wondering. I've heard that if you're on testosterone treatments, your testicles get smaller. Is that true?
Dr. Smith: Absolutely.
Scot: Okay. How small are we talking? Yeah.
Troy: What are we talking here? Yeah. Like raisin-size?
Scot: I mean, for running marathons, Troy, that might not be a terrible deal. Right?
Troy: Thanks, Scot. Much less chafing. Yeah.
Dr. Smith: He's looking out for you, Troy. He's looking out for you.
Troy: Exactly. It'd just be nice smooth surface down there.
Dr. Smith: You'll shave minutes off your time.
Troy: Exactly. All that extra weight.
Dr. Smith: Yeah, you won't have the metronome like you've got now, but it'll work out.
Troy: That's right.
Dr. Smith: But they do shrink, and over time you'll notice that testicular size loss happens the longer you're on testosterone. So people who've been on, say, long-term injectable testosterone, they'll shrink down and be very, very small when you get down to it, almost to raisin-like size that you'll see, which is something that I always talk to people about. And again, that's where HCG can come in if you want to preserve testicular size.
And to some people, that's important. And to other people, I say, "If you're not looking to have kids and it doesn't really matter to you . . ." I've never, ever in my experience of having this had someone come in with their spouse and had them saying, "Man, you know what? I just wish Troy's balls were bigger."
So I don't know how much it really matters, but I think a lot of times it is kind of the vanity side of it, of, "This is what I know, this is what I've had my whole life, and I don't want it to change."
Troy: Well, I will tell you, John, hearing that, I'm reassured that your patients are not talking about the size of my testicles.
Dr. Smith: Nor their wives, for that matter.
Troy: That's good.
Scot: John, let's wrap this up. I think we all know your bottom line. I think I've got your bottom line on testosterone treatments. If you're experiencing these symptoms and you get a test and you're in that low range or below, it could be a very good option to help you get some energy back, to help you with your sexual function, with few downsides, really.
Dr. Smith: Yeah. The downsides are minimal. If you're one of those people who overproduces red blood cells or something like that, we keep an eye on it, but yeah, that is the bottom line. If you feel like it's going to make a difference for you, there's a lot of good that can come from it. And it doesn't necessarily have to be a long-term thing. However, most of my patients that are on it are long term.
And I think if you do have questions, go talk to someone that knows what they're talking about. I'm happy to sit down with people. Most of my new hypogonadism patients/low testosterone folks, I like to spend time going over the benefits, the risks, and everything that is involved is involved so that they have a clear picture of what options they have.
And I do have plenty of people who come in and say, "You know what, doc? I think I am going to try to lose 25 pounds and recheck my testosterone." And then I have others who say, "You know what, doc? I just know myself and I'm not going to do that. And so I'm going to take the testosterone and try to do it that way." I think there's merit both ways. Absolutely.
Scot: John, thank you very much for having this conversation with us about testosterone. Hopefully, this will be helpful to a lot of guys. And bottom line, it sounds like perhaps guys who have talked to primary care physicians, haven't gotten a lot of conversation, it sounds like if you do go to a men's health expert, you've got a little bit more time to discuss through some of these issues and really come up with the right choice for each individual guy.
Dr. Smith: Absolutely. I'd be happy to see anybody in our men's health department at The U. I think we do a great job at taking care of folks and making sure that we go over the options and making sure that we help you make the right decision for you.
Scot: Dr. Smith, thank you for being on the podcast and thank you for caring about men's health.
Dr. Smith: Gents, thanks for having me. It's always a pleasure.
Relevant Links:
Contact: hello@thescoperadio.com
Listener Line: 601-55-SCOPE
The Scope Radio: https://thescoperadio.com
Who Cares About Men’s Health?: https://whocaresmenshealth.com
Facebook: https://www.facebook.com/whocaresmenshealthThis content was originally produced for audio. Certain elements such as tone, sound effects, and music, may not fully capture the intended experience in textual representation. Therefore, the following transcription has been modified for clarity. We recognize not everyone can access the audio podcast. However, for those who can, we encourage subscribing and listening to the original content for a more engaging and immersive experience.
All thoughts and opinions expressed by hosts and guests are their own and do not necessarily reflect the views held by the institutions with which they are affiliated.
Scot: You guys want to hear an epic tale?
Mitch: How epic?
Troy: I'm ready.
Scot: Should I tell it in my epic tale voice?
Troy: Please.
Scot: There are other people around though and I think they can hear me, so I'm feeling a little shy about it right now.
Dr. Smith: Let it go.
Scot: The office I . . . Listen and you shall hear the tale of two guys and testosterone therapy. One guy got amazing life-changing results, the other none, nothing, nada, zip, zero, bupkis. In the telling of this tale of T, we hope we can help all men learn why T works for some guys and not others. Was that epic?
Troy: That's epic. Who uses the word bupkis anymore, though? Bupkis?
Scot: This is "Who Cares About Men's Health," providing information, inspiration, and a different interpretation of men's health. And today, to tell the tale of T are the "Who Cares About Men's Health" players. I am Scot and, obviously, I bring the BS. Balancing my BS with his MD is Dr. Troy Madsen.
Troy: I'm not part of the tale of T, but I'm excited to learn more about it.
Scot: But your name begins with T.
Troy: Oh, that's right.
Scot: Producer Mitch is also in the mix.
Mitch: Hey, there. I didn't know we were players. I kind of like that.
Scot: And Dr. John Smith is from the Division of Urology at University Utah Health. And he's going to talk us through testosterone therapy in our tale of two different guys with two very different experiences with testosterone. Dr. Smith, as always, it's great having you on the show.
Dr. Smith: Gentlemen, thank you for having me.
Scot: By the way, your shows that you do with us are quite often the most listened to shows. And I don't know if it's because the topics you talk about are just really that interesting to people, or if it's because you have lots of family members. But I don't care. It doesn't matter to me.
Dr. Smith: We Smiths are a large clan.
Scot: There's kind of this implied thing and . . . I don't know. Maybe it's just me, but I think it's a lot of guys, that testosterone is kind of a cure-all for men who are suffering from fatigue, or struggling to lose weight, or struggling to put on muscle mass, or their sex drive is reduced. So it's kind of like, "All guys should be on it," right?
But we've talked about testosterone on the show before and testosterone therapy, and it's not a magic bullet. It works for some guys, and some guys, it doesn't necessarily work for. The only time it's a magic bullet apparently is if you're Mitch. We're going to hear about his pretty amazing story with testosterone.
And then, on the other hand, we're going to hear about my experience that I had with it that I haven't really talked about on the show, because I had a hard time putting it into words and figuring out what that story was. But after hearing Mitch's story, I figured out what my story is.
And I think in this process, we could kind of learn a little something about testosterone therapy, that it's not this universal cure-all. And Dr. Smith would back that up, right? It's not a universal cure-all like the ads would have you believe.
Dr. Smith: Well, I think a lot of it depends too on your patient selection. A lot of guys come in because they hear about a guy like Mitch where it changes things for them, their life is great, they have a lot of benefit from it. And they go get their testosterone checked, and they may not even have low testosterone. It may be something else. And so you do see a relative benefit for some and not others based on lab results and other things.
Scot: So, back in Episode 102, Dr. Smith talked about how maybe some guys with low testosterone might slip through the cracks because their doctors aren't necessarily familiar with hormone therapies or they're not comfortable with them as opposed to Dr. Smith, who's studied this and has put in more time as an expert. Not saying anything bad about anybody else. It's just that he's had a lot more experience with it.
So that conversation made Mitch seek a second opinion that's made a huge difference in all aspects of his health. And I think this is a great chance to hear Mitch's story, what he was struggling with, and then the process that he went through to finally get on testosterone therapy and find out how that's impacted his life.
And I think it's a great story of how testosterone therapy can help some men, and how you also kind of need to be an advocate for your own health sometimes. You have to kind of work through the system. So, Mitch, tell us your story.
Mitch: It was very interesting. The recording of that particular episode was like smack dab in the middle of a yearlong struggle with some really, really severe fatigue, right? And we're talking physical, mental. Every day I was just tired. I was dragging myself, and I felt it in my joints. I felt it in my brain. And it just kind of kept getting worse and worse.
And we talk about on the show, "Oh, yeah, get more physical activity. Change your diet." If you're so tired all the time, the idea of getting up and running for 30 minutes, I'd be completely worn out for the rest of the day. I would just be that physically exhausted.
And it was even my therapist, my mental health person, who was saying, "Hey, you're obviously not doing the work that we're doing every week because you're so tired. You're so out of it. We can't help pull you out of whatever's going on if you're this out of it."
So after kind of talking through it and just struggling with all of this, I decided to go to my PCP. And I told him, "Hey, I'm dealing with some severe fatigue. It's been going for a very long time," blah, blah, blah. But I was like, "Hey, what could be wrong?" And so he did a whole bunch of panels. We ruled out things like diabetes and all these other conditions. He took tons of vials of blood out of me, and they all came back normal.
And he kind of said, "Well, why don't we try some lifestyle changes?" So I tried. For months, I was doing healthy meals every day. I was going to bed at a certain time. I was trying to drag myself out of bed every morning just to go on a little jog or working out. I was doing everything I possibly could, but I still was tired and I was putting on weight.
And even when I went back and I said, "Hey, I've tried the things and I don't mean to backseat doctor, I'm just a podcaster, but I have a feeling that something else is going on. I'm not lying to you. I really am doing all the things I think I'm supposed to." And the response was to prescribe me antidepressants. There was such a confidence in my doctor that it must be something mental that's causing my exhaustion.
And I took him at face value, so I went and I took the antidepressants. I tried it out and had kind of weird motional swings for a week or two. And I don't know, it still wasn't going away.
And about that time is when we recorded the episode. If there's any love letter to the show and the idea that talking about health can be a huge change for people, we had a conversation about this very thing where it's like, "Hey, sometimes your PCP might not feel super comfortable giving you hormone therapy because they're not super trained in it."
And after hearing that, I decided to reach out to Dr. John Smith because what better men's health person to talk to you than someone I've already interviewed? We got the test done, and sure enough, my levels were pretty low. They were under 300. We took both of them in the morning to make sure we were minimizing any other potential things that were going on. But I had really low testosterone.
Dr. Smith: Mitch, I love your story because your PCP is awesome. The fact that he took the time to go through all of those things with you and make sure that it's not something else. I have a lot of people's PCPs who won't take that time. Not that they don't have the time, but sometimes PCPs are overwhelmed.
But bless his heart, or her, for going through the time to get the blood work and make sure all those things are normal. Because I've found plenty of folks who come in who have thyroid issues or other issues that are causing their fatigue. So I just wanted to put a plug in for your PCP and some kudos and a pat on the back for taking the time to really make sure that they covered all their bases.
Troy: I'm curious too, John, hearing this, what do you think happened with that blood test with the testosterone level with his PCP? Because it sounds like it was above 300 and then when you tested it was well under 300. Do you think that was testosterone levels dropping over time, or maybe just the way the PCP did the test? What's your take there?
Dr. Smith: So I've had patients who've had three or four testosterone levels done. They'll have one that's in the low 300s, and then the next one will be like 240. And then they'll have one that's like 380. And so it does vary based on diet, exercise, and some of those things that are going on. We don't fully know 100% why, but it is variable. But most of the time, those people who are lower tend to be lower on average.
And so insurance requires two morning draw testosterones. And the AUA, or the American Urologic Association, has also kind of backed that up of two morning draw testosterones that show a low level.
Scot: And what if a patient is at, like, 320? Three hundred is the lower limit. Is it up to a doctor's discretion at that point based on symptoms, or how does that work?
Dr. Smith: Patients who are symptomatic in the low 300s, sometimes they do benefit from testosterone where their body does need to be a little bit higher in that normal range. And so taking the opportunity to try it. Like you said, some people it's great and it works, and some people don't notice a huge benefit when they are supplemented in that range.
But sometimes it's worth a try, especially if you've tried other things, you've got other lab work, and everything looks normal. Well, let's try it and see if we can benefit you and help your fatigue and those other things.
So it is kind of doctor discretion and having that conversation with your patient of, "Hey, this is may be very helpful and it may not. Let's find out and just see."
Troy: You mentioned also insurance coverage. Does insurance require levels less than 300 to pay for the treatment?
Dr. Smith: Usually they do want to see low levels of testosterone before they'll pay for treatment. A lot of them aren't sticklers. If you're like 330, 320 and you have a second level that's like 289 or 301, they're usually pretty good about making sure that things are taken care of.
However, that being said, certain forms of testosterone replacement are fairly inexpensive with discount programs like GoodRx, and SingleCare, some of these websites online that have kind of created relationships with pharmacies to give people discounts. So it's not this cost burden if insurance did ever balk it and your doctor was like, "Hey, I think you'd really benefit."
Troy: So I have to ask you this just because you kind of went that direction too. If someone's paying out of pocket, what does it cost?
Dr. Smith: So injectable testosterone is by far the least expensive. And depending on what your dose is, you can get two or three months for $20, $25.
Mitch: Oh, wow.
Troy: Oh, wow. That's super cheap.
Dr. Smith: So it's not this killer expense. And then other forms of it, if you want to be fertility friendly and things like that, there are some other off-label uses for medications like clomiphene, which we've talked about, or Clomid. And that again is something that you're going to pay $20, $30 for a few months' worth of medication. So the cost burden is there but $20, $30, if it changed your energy level and a lot of those things, is completely worth it.
Troy: That's surprisingly inexpensive. As someone who's purchased over-the-counter omeprazole, I will say that's a whole lot less expensive than treating yourself for heartburn.
Scot: Wow.
Troy: I'm surprised at how inexpensive that is.
Scot: So what was Mitch diagnosed with? Was it just low testosterone or is there a specific name for it or?
Dr. Smith: So the $500 word is hypogonadism. Everyone else just says low T. But it's the exact same thing.
Scot: I'm going to choose low T.
Troy: I know. Hypogonadism just doesn't sound good. Let's go low T.
Dr. Smith: Low T works very well.
Scot: Yeah. So I was surprised when Mitch told me what his particular treatment option was because . . . and I'll get to my story in a bit. I used a rub-on cream, which I think is actually testosterone, right? But it wasn't testosterone that Mitch got. It was something else.
Dr. Smith: So Mitch was put on a drug called Clomid. And this drug stimulates the brain, the pituitary to produce hormones. One is called luteinizing hormone. The other one is called follicle-stimulating hormone. And these two hormones stimulate the testicles to make testosterone and sperm. And in that way, we were able to alter the body's production of sperm and up-regulate it. And so that's what the drug that Mitch had, or has, does.
Now, the creams and the injections are giving exogenous testosterone into the body and actually causes the body to kind of shut down its own production because we're giving the body this exogenous testosterone. And so that's kind of the difference between those two, even though both of them are very beneficial for patients.
Mitch: So with the medication I'm on, my body and my testicles are capable of producing testosterone, but for one reason or another, it wasn't making enough. And so we're now putting a drug into jack those numbers up. Is that how it kind of works?
Dr. Smith: Exactly.
Troy: Talking about the Clomid . . . I don't know that we ever really talked about why Mitch is on Clomid versus exogenous testosterone. Mitch, was that a decision you made kind of hearing side effects and what's involved in each one? Or, John, is that typically first-line treatment? What was that decision process?
Mitch: So Dr. Smith was really, really good. We had a conversation, right? He talked through the different options and he said, "Hey, some patients prefer this over this. Here's why." Here's blah, blah, blah. And so, for me at least, it was a joint decision.
And it sounded like, for me, that Clomid was the easiest entry point, right? See if my body can make this stuff anyway, and if it can, great. If not, we can try something else. And taking half a pill every other day is a whole lot easier for me than getting injections or a magic cream or whatever. So I thought I would start with that first.
Scot: Dr. Smith, does Clomid work for some men and not quite so well for others? Are there kind of some criteria that you would use to have that be the first thing, or is that generally the first thing you try?
Dr. Smith: No. I usually have a conversation, like Mitch said. I like to lay out the options because I feel like the more information the patient has, the better off they are.
And some people prefer to take a pill versus giving themselves an injection versus having a cream. Each one of them has a plus and a minus to them. And so having that conversation, giving them the options, letting them know what is available, and then what fits best for their lifestyle. That's how I like to do it personally.
Clomid may not work for some people because if the testicles of a certain individual are not able to produce sufficient testosterone, then the Clomid isn't going to help. No matter how much we stimulate the testicles, if they're unable to produce what we need them to produce, it's not going to make a difference. And so in certain individuals, that isn't an option that works.
We'll try it and then they'll come back and their labs haven't changed and they're like, "Well, what happened?" And I say, "Well, your testicles just can't produce anymore, so you need to be on exogenous testosterone. We need to give you testosterone because you can't make your own." So those would be the people who Clomid would not work for.
Scot: So is there anything else we need to cover about what Mitch is on? Should we just get to Mitch's results? Is there anything else to that part of the story, Mitch? You went through this.
Mitch: No, not really. I got on a cheap pill and things turned around. It was awesome.
Scot: Yeah, but drastically, the kind of drastic that we make fun of. Like, it's the silver bullet. We spent a lot of time . . . at least I felt like I did. Maybe Dr. Smith didn't. But upon reflection, I wanted to communicate this is not a silver bullet, right? You still have to do these other things, and you should try these other things. But for you, it was kind of a silver bullet.
Mitch: Yeah. It was night and day. It took me about a week to notice anything. So I show up to the pharmacy, I pay my $30, I get this big pile of meds, and I just start taking one. And after about a week, that weekend I woke up feeling like I had had the first full night's rest that I've had in years, right? I just woke up and felt amazing.
And it kept going. I could keep having energy. When I got done with work I actually felt like I could do something in my evening, like I could work out, or go for a walk, or do a hobby, or something, rather than just crash in front of Netflix and order GrubHub.
And it wasn't just that. I was suddenly able to work out without feeling completely wrecked, right? It used to be I'd do a hard set at a gym or something like that and I would just . . . it would drain the last bit of energy I had left in me, and so I just would crash.
And it just felt good mentally. Mentally, I was able to be sharper. I was able to focus on things. This brain fog and overall physical fatigue that was going on completely disappeared. And then on top of that, I lost 25 pounds in a month.
Troy: That was the crazy part.
Mitch: After years of struggling with weight and doing everything I was supposed to and never seeing anything, suddenly a month after getting on this medication, I lost all of . . . It's slowed down now. I'm not continuing to lose all this weight. But it's like something suddenly fell into place and my body worked.
Troy: You lost weight, and you also put on muscle mass too, didn't you?
Mitch: Yeah, I did. But we don't know the exact number.
Scot: He's got to be honest about that.
Troy: You're just downplaying that part. "Yeah, I'm pretty ripped now."
Mitch: I am not ripped, but . . .
Troy: You probably are.
Mitch: No.
Troy: I haven't seen you in a couple months. But this was how long ago? When did you first start the treatment?
Mitch: This summer actually, so a couple months ago.
Troy: So it's been a couple of months. That's what I wondered too with treatment. Is it like there's sort of this honeymoon phase where everything is great and you feel good, and you lose weight, and then after a month, everything kind of levels off or maybe there's a little bit of a rebound? But it sounds like, in your case, everything is still good. Things are going well.
Mitch: I mean, I'm not still losing two or three pounds a week, but I still have my energy. I still feel mentally sharp and good. And they're talking about maybe even minimizing and taking me off of some of my mental health medication I've been on because of how much better I'm doing.
Troy: Wow.
Mitch: Yeah, big change.
Troy: That's great. No, that's huge. John, is that typical? Is Mitch's experience typical?
Dr. Smith: I think Mitch is at the higher end of what people experience. I will say most people within the first year, the testosterone literature will tell you that you'll have a body mass change where you'll lose about 2.5 kilograms of body fat and you'll increase lean muscle mass. So that's something that you see across the board.
Mitch is probably someone who is in better shape than most of my patients. So folks who are a little bit more out of shape may not notice that muscle mass change as much as Mitch did. Because Mitch has done a very nice job of staying in shape and taking care of his body and being in a good body mass to start, and that makes a huge difference for patients.
But I would say Mitch is on the higher end of people who have done very, very well and are very pleased with their treatment.
I would say, overall, most people who get a benefit, they do maintain that energy improvement and things like that.
On a caveat, if you have the desire to go to the gym and you're just too tired, the testosterone isn't going to make you want to go to the gym. But if you had that inherently before and the fatigue was impacting you, once you get that energy back, you're going to want to go back to those things that you enjoyed, if that makes sense.
Scot: Mitch also talked about how mentally he was feeling better. Is that common that the testosterone can help there? What do you think is going on with that, Dr. Smith?
Dr. Smith: So there is some debate on that, but overall, when you have more energy, you feel better, you're able to go and do the things that you like to do, you have the energy to go do the things you like to do, your mental health status changes, and you feel better. And I think that just stands to reason.
People who get a good result from hormone therapy of one reason or another, they tend to be happier. They tend to feel better. Because when you feel better and you're able to go and be active and do things and have energy to do things, overall you do feel better. Overall, things are just better.
Scot: All right, Mitch. Now the dark side. Are there any side effects?
Mitch: But they're all testosterone related. It's not like the medication . . . It's like Dr. Smith was talking about earlier. I used to have to shave maybe once every week and a half. Now I'm shaving twice a week. So we'll see if I can . . .
Scot: Like a regular teen wolf.
Troy: Wait a second. You used to only shave once every week and a half? Was this because you wanted to grow out a beard and then you'd shave it off, or . . .
Mitch: No, I couldn't grow any facial hair. I've always been a little baby face. So yeah, I'm having to learn how to shave all over again and more frequently.
Troy: But to say more frequently, just twice a week, though.
Mitch: Yeah. That's a significant change.
Troy: From every week and a half, yeah.
Mitch: I'm doing that. I got a little bit of acne on the body. I've been like zit-free since I was 18, 19, and now I'm getting little bumps on my body every now and then. But nothing, a little bit of whatever little special acne stuff or whatever won't help.
And after we chitchatted last time, I'm growing my hair out. I've got this awesome mane going these days, and I started to see it coming out in my comb. So went to Dr. Smith and was like, "Hey, I think I might be losing some of my hair." And he's got me on Propecia. Haven't had any side effects with that. And I guess that'll help control any hair loss that might be involved.
But any of those changes, I would not trade for the world. Being a little hairier, a little zittier, and maybe a little thinner in the hair, I am fine. I would much prefer that than just being tired and miserable all the time.
Troy: So you're going to have this killer beard going on and shave your head, but you're going to feel good.
Mitch: Yeah, 100%.
Troy: Take it.
Dr. Smith: Mr. March of the "Who Cares About Men's Health Podcast," Mountain Man Mitch.
Mitch: We'll see.
Scot: I've been looking for a name for you. I think we might have it there. Thanks, Dr. Smith. I like it.
Troy: Triple M.
Scot: Yeah, that's good. Are there other side effects that some guys would experience in addition to what Mitch is talking about?
Dr. Smith: So those are very typical. Increased testosterone can increase male-pattern baldness. You can get some acne, increased body hair, facial hair, those types of things. Kind of like when you're going through puberty, some of those similar things when the testosterone levels kind of raise like that.
We always watch the red blood cell count because it will stimulate that. Testicular size changes in the case of people who are on exogenous testosterone. It doesn't happen with the Clomid like Mitch is on.
Those are the big ones that most people see. The medication that Mitch is on, the Clomid, some people will have a little bit more of a moodiness or mood swings. They feel like they would cry during a Hallmark movie kind of a thing. Their emotions are a little bit closer to the surface.
I had a guy literally tell me that one time. He's like, "I feel great. I feel like I'm going to cry at a Hallmark movie." And I said, "Okay, so your emotions are a little bit closer to the surface." And he's like, "Yeah, that's kind of what's going on." And so that's the biggest thing with Clomid that people tend to see. But that's pretty typical.
Scot: So after hearing Mitch's story, I got curious about testosterone again myself because I feel like I kind of have the same things. I feel like I've been exercising and doing the right things, but losing body fat is difficult. I feel like I kind of have low energy and some of those things.
I had tried testosterone before back around 2010, so 13 years ago. I had just turned 40 and it really didn't work for me. So I thought, "Well, I'll get my levels tested again and see how they look." And my levels came back right in the middle, like at 650.
That's about as average as you can get, right, Dr. Smith? Because I am the most average man on the face of the earth. You ask me my skills and ability in anything, it's going to be average.
Anyway, with that number, I made the assumption that testosterone therapy is really not going to help me. Would that be a good assumption to make, that that's probably not the issue?
Dr. Smith: Yes. If you're asking me the question, I would say yes. Because if you're in the normal range, there's not a lot of benefit to be had. Now, some people may disagree, but I look at you have a certain number of receptors for testosterone. And if you think about it like a parking lot, if you have 600 parking spaces and 1,400 cars, it really doesn't matter how many parking spaces you have, you're not going to be able to fit all the cars.
And so with a normal testosterone in a normal range, you're going to be saturating those parking spaces, aka those receptors, that the testosterone interacts with. And so the benefit ratio of taking someone with low testosterone where there are too many open parking spaces, so to speak, to someone who's got almost all the parking spaces full all the time, you can see how the benefit would be there or wouldn't be there. And so normal testosterone, adding more doesn't necessarily improve things.
Scot: So I'm going to say, first of all, you have the best analogies of any of our guests ever. Every single episode, you just nail it with an analogy. That was awesome.
Troy: Parking spaces. That makes perfect sense.
Scot: That was fantastic. So I'm going to try to keep my story short when I tried testosterone for the first time. I tried it for a couple of years and really didn't notice any benefits, and it was a lot more hassle than it was worth.
So I had just turned 40 and I was working at a place and there was this guy that was really super muscular. He was younger, and he was like, "Oh, man, as soon as I turn 30, I'm going to go to the doctor and get testosterone therapy." Because he is under this impression that you start losing testosterone as you get older, which is true.
And then you see the ads in the media, and there, again, this seems to be recurring in my life, low energy. I've always wanted to put on muscle and I've always found it difficult even when I weight train. Losing the fat is difficult even when I feel as though I'm doing things right.
So I had another friend who started testosterone, had some results like Mitch. It gave him this energy and drive again. So he referred me to this particular doctor. I got the test. They got the levels. They put me on the cream. I did that for a couple years. After a few months, they ended up putting me on some pills to balance the hormones that the testosterone cream was causing.
And I also didn't like the fact that since I was using the cream, I had to be really careful my spouse didn't get near it. And I really wasn't noticing any difference. So I just ultimately kind of ended up quitting that.
Fast forward to the last episode we did, I thought, "Wow, I wonder if I could go back and pull those old labs and see what my testosterone levels were." And even back then, they were around 600 and 650.
So what this physician and I were trying to do is we were trying to optimize, get at that upper level thinking that that's going to make me feel even better.
And after learning from you, Dr. Smith, and your awesome parking space analogy, it makes total sense why that didn't help me. So in that case, testosterone really wasn't the solution for my problems or my perceived problems of energy and whatnot.
So in a way, I'm kind of jealous of Mitch, but also in a way, I'm glad to know that everything is okay. And maybe now I can kind of be a little bit more honest with myself. Am I going to bed at a decent time? Am I eating the way I need to be eating? Am I getting enough calories? Could there be some other reasons why I feel like I'm tired, or is it just my perception?
So that was my story, which is very drastically different from Mitch's, but I think it really illustrates that if you don't need it, getting more is not going to necessarily help.
Mitch: So did you have any response to the treatment? Did you feel anything other than just kind of the same?
Scot: No, not really. I think at first I kind of thought maybe I did, but that could have been the placebo effect. I don't know. Ultimately, I didn't notice a whole lot of difference over the long term. And that, in combination with the downsides, is kind of why I just decided to stop.
Dr. Smith: Scot, that's been a little while ago. Have you had your levels rechecked recently?
Scot: Yeah, I just had them rechecked after Mitch had such success with his treatment and found that they're just dead in the middle.
Troy: They're still . . .
Scot: That's that 650 level.
Troy: Okay. So still 650. Yeah, maybe I missed that. Because you were 650 years ago, and just everything has stayed exactly the same. Clearly no benefit for you to go on testosterone at this point.
Scot: Yeah. So what was the difference there between my experience and Mitch's experience, Dr. Smith? Do you have any more insight to that?
Dr. Smith: So we kind of talked about this a little earlier. Mitch had low testosterone, so adding more cars to the parking lot made sense. For you, you could make the argument that you may have even changed the cars in the parking lot initially because when you start testosterone, your body is going to shut down your production. And so you're really just keeping yourself at that same level.
And I don't know what your labs looked like, if they rechecked your labs and things. But I've had people who've come in to me from other outside places who've said, "I've been on testosterone for about a year and a half." And they bring me their original labs and they're kind of like yours or kind of in the middle of the range, 550, 600. And I look at their numbers on testosterone and they're, like, 720. And so really, they didn't do a whole lot other than shut down their body's native production.
Now, I've had some people come in who were just being dosed up very, very high, who their testosterone levels were off the charts. And some of them said, "Oh, I feel great." And some of that, I'm guessing, is placebo.
But I've had some patients who, at a higher range, they do say they feel better. And I don't know that it's all placebo. And so there could be some benefit to that.
But being in the normal range, you're not going to get a ton of benefit. And so I think that's really where we look at it and we say there's not a whole lot more that you need to do.
And I would say that some of the patients I have that come in, they'll get sent by their primary doctor after they've had a couple of testosterone tests that are in the normal range. And they'll come in and I'll look at them and they may be . . . Their body habitus may be larger.
I'll ask them questions like, "Do you snore?" Because I've diagnosed plenty of folks with sleep apnea where they get that treated and they feel like a million dollars. And it wasn't their testosterone. It's that they were waking up 30 times a night because they were having sleep apnea events during the night. Things like that I've seen.
You have to ask the questions around to get to the answer for some of those folks. Some people may be on extreme diets trying to lose weight and they're like, "I'm just tired." And I'm like, "Yeah, you're eating 500 calories a day. I don't know why you would be tired."
Things like that are going on where you've got to ask the questions because you'll get to the answer. "Hey, well, if you start eating 1,200 calories or 1,500 calories, you'll probably have more energy because your body is not going to try to store everything thinking that it's never going to eat again."
And so some of those things I see in folks where they have symptoms but their testosterone is in that middle of the road, kind of like yours was, Scot.
Troy: Speaking of levels, I know we're talking about you, Scot, but I've got to bring it back to Mitch. Mitch, do you know what your level is now?
Mitch: It's in the 700s.
Dr. Smith: So he's not through the roof, but he's pushing towards the upper end of the normal range.
Troy: Yeah. Nice.
Scot: I mean, I feel completely great with my decision now in retrospect, because I think being on it could cause more problems for me when I didn't have a problem to begin with, right? Because there are downsides. Doesn't your body kind of stop making it if you're putting cream on long enough?
Dr. Smith: Yeah.
Scot: Any take-home messages? What are the take-home messages here, Troy? What do you think? What did you get out of this episode?
Troy: My take-home message from all this is if you're experiencing something like Mitch experienced, it makes sense to get your testosterone level checked. And it also makes sense to pursue treatment when treatment will work. And if the parking spaces are full, there's no point in putting more cars in the parking lot. That's my takeaway.
Mitch: Sure. That's a good one.
Scot: How about you, Mitch?
Mitch: I think the big one for me is to talk to each other about health. I would not have been on this kind of journey, I would not have advocated for myself, I would not have sought out a second opinion had I not talked to other men on this podcast and in my life about testosterone, about their experience with it, etc. I would not be where I am today or thinking about my health the way it was if I did not talk to other men about my health.
Scot: Dr. Smith, do you have something that you'd like to throw out as a take-home message?
Dr. Smith: I love it. I'm super happy for Mitch. And I'm also happy that you were able to kind of find your way. You mentioned it earlier about being an advocate. I tell patients all the time, "I get to see you for 15 minutes and you know your body a heck of a lot better than I do. And so if you think something is wrong . . ." Like Mitch, he was like, "There's just something missing here. What is it?"
Being an advocate for yourself and finding someone to have that conversation with about these things, because it can make the difference. Or it may not make the difference, but at least you'll understand the reason why and you can then make the informed decision of which way to go.
So I think that, for me, was the take-home. You guys both did that in your own way even though you ended up in two different places.
Scot: And those gentlemen are the two tales of T today on "Who Cares About Men's Health." Great conversation. Guys, as always, it's a pleasure to get together and talk about men's health. Dr. Smith, it was great having you on the show. Thank you for listening, and thank you for caring about men's health.
Dr. Smith: Take care.
Host: Troy Madsen, Scot Singpiel, Mitch Sears
Guest: John Smith, DO
Producer: Scot Singpiel, Mitch Sears
Connect with 'Who Cares About Men's Health'
Email: hello@thescoperadio.com
thescoperadio.com
whocaresmenshealth.comThis content was originally produced for audio. Certain elements such as tone, sound effects, and music, may not fully capture the intended experience in textual representation. Therefore, the following transcription has been modified for clarity. We recognize not everyone can access the audio podcast. However, for those who can, we encourage subscribing and listening to the original content for a more engaging and immersive experience.
All thoughts and opinions expressed by hosts and guests are their own and do not necessarily reflect the views held by the institutions with which they are affiliated.
Scot: All right. You think that maybe testosterone treatment is going to help you with the symptoms you are experiencing, but then you find out your testosterone is fine. You still have symptoms, though. So then what? What's next? We're going to find out today.
This is "Who Cares About Men's Health," with information, inspiration, and a different interpretation of men's health. My name is Scot. I bring the BS. The MD to my BS, urologist Dr. John Smith.
Dr. Smith: Good morning. How are you?
Scot: And also a guy who cares about men's health . . . he's become a men's health advocate, actually. It's been an amazing transformation. Mitch Sears is on the show.
Mitch: Hey there.
Scot: All right. So the premise of this whole show today is a guy . . . I mean, we hear through popular culture . . . The symptom list is long about all the things that testosterone can impact or could be a reason for. Why don't you list off some of those symptoms that guys come in for testosterone treatment for? Give us that list.
Dr. Smith: Yeah. So most people come in because they have a decrease in their libido or their sex drive. They have decreased energy or difficulty with focus, or brain fog is what a lot of folks will call it as. Some people as they age, too, will say, "I'm having difficulty maintaining muscle mass at the gym. Things just feel different." And that's generally what they have.
And oftentimes when they come in to see me, too, they've also had a friend or family member who was like, "Oh, yeah, I got on testosterone and I feel so much better."
Scot: That was my case. I knew a couple of guys that got on testosterone and their energy came back. And to me, that's a big thing. I feel kind of tired all the time and I'm like, "This is it. This is awesome. And if I get the side effect of now all of a sudden when I go to the gym and I work out, maybe some things start happening in a better way, or maybe the muscle mass doesn't go away, that would be great." But that ended up not being my case. Does that happen to a lot of guys?
Dr. Smith: It happens a lot. So a lot of people that come to me already have low testosterone from their primary care doctors, and then other folks that come in to see me may have had a friend that came in to see someone in the men's health space or whatever. And so we get new labs with them, and they come in and they have a normal testosterone, like in 400 or 500 or 600, which is a normal level where a majority of people on the street are hanging out at.
At that point, it's like, "Well, this isn't the cause of all of your symptoms." And so we look for other options of "What could this be?"
Scot: Yeah. And I want to be sure . . . because I think this is an important point. Now, we've done other episodes on low testosterone and have gone into this in depth, but I think a misconception men have is, "Well, my testosterone is in the middle of the range. Boy, if I got it to the upper end of the range, then now we're really going." But that's not the case, you've told us.
Dr. Smith: Well, there's not a lot of evidence to suggest that that's the case, that if you live at a higher level, you're necessarily going to feel better or things are going to be better.
Obviously, I think there probably is placebo to a lot of things that people do in their life. And I think that there is more placebo there than not. Testosterone receptors can only be stimulated to a certain point, and then beyond that, you've filled up all the receptors and what are you stimulating after that? You just have testosterone floating around.
Scot: Right. And I was right in the middle of that range, just kind of in that sweet spot. But at the time I was going to a different provider who was of the opinion, "Well, let's get you to the upper end of that range." And I can tell you in my experience, that didn't make a difference for me.
It actually became more of a hassle because now I'm doing testosterone therapy. I'm taking some other pill because as a result of my testosterone therapy, something else is happening. And I ended up just bailing on it because I wasn't seeing the benefits.
Dr. Smith: And you're not alone. I see that happen quite a bit. Now, I think there are people who say they do feel better at an upper limit of those ranges. But again, a majority of the patients that I see who are in the normal range, supplementing testosterone is not necessarily the answer and you may be actually missing other things that may be more beneficial for you.
Scot: Now, Mitch actually did have low testosterone. Did it help you?
Mitch: A lot, yeah. It was kind of interesting. I was constantly tired. I was having severe fatigue that just lasted forever. And finally went to a specialist and said, "Hey, can we test this?" And sure enough, I was quite low. Got me on a medication, and I got some energy back. I lost some weight. Things were going pretty well.
But that being said, we're now, say, a year or two afterwards and my testosterone is fine, but other things are . . . I still sometimes feel tired and it's probably because of my sleeping habits or my lack of whatever. I no longer can blame testosterone for any of that.
Scot: Right. But it did help to some extent.
Dr. Smith, Mitch is the frustrating case for a guy like me who's like, "It worked for him, but I'm still experiencing the symptoms and it's not T." So let's go beyond that. Somebody has come in and you find out their testosterone is great. It's in that healthy range. What next? How do we address their symptoms?
Dr. Smith: So I generally start with just asking some general questions. I mean, some of the easy ones to ask are, "What does your diet and exercise routine look like?" "Do you snore?" is a big one. "What do you do for work? What things are you involved in where you may or may not be out in the sun getting increases in your vitamin D, different vitamin deficiencies, things like that?" Those are some of the big ones that are easy, low-hanging fruit for me.
If someone snores really bad or they're like, "Yeah, my partner says I snore like a trucker," I'm like, "You should probably get checked out for sleep apnea." And so people who have sleep apnea, they're not sleeping at night, they're not getting restful sleep, they're never getting into deep sleep, which is the restorative and restful sleep. And so those folks need to get in and see somebody.
A lot of times, they don't want that to be the answer. "Well, I'd rather just do testosterone. I'll feel better, right?" And it's like, "No, you're not going to feel any better unless you treat the sleep apnea."
Scot: So sleep apnea could be one of the things that you run into. In your practice, what do you tend to run into when it's not testosterone?
Dr. Smith: So I usually run some lab work. I ask those questions and then I also get some lab work. I check people's thyroid, because thyroid is another driver of metabolism and energy kind of maintenance in the body. I'll check vitamins like vitamin D, vitamin B12, things like that, that are also known to be energy-helping vitamins.
And I find that most people who live where we live are low on vitamin D unless they're supplementing, because we just don't get out enough in the sun. Our bodies can create vitamin D. However, we supplement our food. Some of our foods are fortified with that as well.
And then on the flip side of that, if you're not out producing vitamin D, you've got to supplement it somehow. And that can really be a good vitamin to have. I think anybody that lives in our area, in our parallel, should be supplementing vitamin D because you're likely low.
B12 is another one that can really be beneficial. I mean, you've probably seen ads for different places where you can come in and get an IV with vitamins in it or, "You can get your B12 shot here." Those do help quite a bit.
And then also just looking at other things in that regard, and looking at sleep apnea, looking at those things as well, checking diabetic markers.
And then talking to people about just overall diet and exercise. If you're eating McDonald's every single day, one meal a day, and you're not exercising, I'm going to tell you right now, your body is not going to be getting the nutrition it needs and it's going to be running in a really sluggish pace. And so some of those things of talking about diet and exercise can really be beneficial for these folks.
Scot: Got it. So you ask some questions, you run some tests, and then after you do those things . . . back to kind of the original question there, but I'm glad you expanded on that for us . . . what generally do you see in your practice then? Is there anything that kind of tends to stand out to be the cause more than anything else?
Dr. Smith: Yeah, most people that I check their vitamin D, it's low. I think it's a rarity that I find somebody who's not low. That would be number one.
And then the other things, I do diagnose quite a bit of sleep apnea because a lot of people are like, "Oh, I thought it was testosterone." And then when you're like, "No, it's not testosterone. You should get that checked out," then they're finally like, "Well, I don't have an excuse not to get this checked out now." And so they go and get that done, and that does a world of difference for people.
I do catch people's thyroid disease when they haven't seen their primary doctor, because as we've talked about before, men don't like to go to the doctor. And so once they get into my office, I can check some of those labs and really kind of drill down on that.
I think overall, a lot of the diet exercise. But another one that Mitch hit on is sleeping patterns. And that's something that I'll drill down on with people too, called sleep hygiene. When are you going to bed? What are you doing around the times you're going to bed? Are you getting restful sleep? Are you allowing yourself to get restful sleep?
A lot of people will stay up later than they need to, and then they've got to get up early for work. So they're going to bed at 12:30, 1:00, and waking up at 5:30 to get to work. And so you're really not giving your body adequate rest. Of course you're tired, but they don't think about it because they've been doing it for so many years and their body just gets run down.
And then maybe your diet gets a little bit less clean, and those things just really . . . I drill down on that with people because it makes a huge difference.
Scot: Yeah. We talk about the Core Four, and sleep is one of them, right? What you're putting in your body for food/your diet, your exercise, your mental health, and sleep is right up there. Mitch, go ahead.
Mitch: Recently I've felt kind of tired and fatigued, and there was just a moment where I'm like, "Am I low on testosterone again?" But then I checked my sleep tracker and I've been having some insomnia episodes, etc. It's like, "Oh, okay. Yep. That's what's going on. Not this magic hormone that's causing all of my ills."
Dr. Smith: Yeah, I think we tend to understate those things because it's like, "Oh, man, I used to pull all-nighters when I was in college to get through classes and it didn't bother me. I could go out and party on Friday night with my friends or whatever." And so a lot of times we like to discount those things to make them not the thing, but it's always those simple things. It's like you say, your Core Four.
And the mental health side of things is another thing. People who have high levels of anxiety and depression tend to have fatigue and have those things as well. And so getting those things treated and putting yourself in a good headspace can make a huge difference as well.
Scot: I remember when I went to a doctor at one point who I said, "Could it be low testosterone?" And he started talking about the things you started talking about and I didn't want to hear it. I'm like, "No." In my head I'm like, "Fine. Whatever," and I went and found a different doctor who, like I said, had a different philosophy on it.
But in retrospect, those were the things that I should have been focusing on, obviously, because testosterone was not the issue. And it was very challenging for me to be honest with myself about, "I get to bed pretty early. I'm getting enough sleep." But as soon as I start really paying attention, I'm like, "No, you're actually not. You're not getting the seven to nine hours that they say you should have."
You're not getting to bed as early as you think. Maybe you're not eating as well as you think. You have this story you've been telling yourself that you're a person who gets out and gets activity, but actually in the past couple years that's changed quite a bit because of your job and your lifestyle. So you really have to kind of be honest.
Is it difficult for men to be honest with themselves about that, or was that just me?
Dr. Smith: No, I think you're right on. We juxtapose your tale of having normal testosterone and it not being the problem, and now Mitch had low testosterone, he felt great, but then when those other things tend to slide, you tend to have symptom return that you think is low testosterone, because that's what you heard on the TV. That's what you heard from your friends, right?
And in reality, it is hard to be honest with ourselves. It's like when we talked about men who don't like to go to the doctor. None of us like to think that we're in any way not healthy. But when we really take stock on our lifestyle, it's like, "Well, what have you been eating? What have you been doing? How is your sleep?" A lot of those things do play a huge role.
And again, I tend to level with people and I'm very blunt, for better or for worse. Some of my patients appreciate it, some of them not as much. But I tend to tell people, "Hey, I'm not here to be your best friend and tell you that everything is going to be okay. I'm here to help you feel better. That's why you came here and paid your copay, was so that I could help you understand what's going on that can better your life. And if testosterone is the answer, then great. But if it's not the answer, then we need to look at things that are really going to be of benefit to you."
Mitch: Dr. Smith, I have this question. We do know that in my case, where I did have lower testosterone outside of the normal range, one of the reasons that I started feeling better was once my hormones got to a regular level, I could go and do more exercise. I did find myself sleeping better, and one thing after another, I was doing pretty well initially.
Is there ever a point where we recognize that it might not be testosterone, but if someone is in the kind of lower ranges, that maybe a little bit of something will help kick start some of those life changes?"
Dr. Smith: Sure. And I think people who are on the low-normal side of things, I've erred on the side of just saying, "Hey, let's see if this helps. Let's give you a dose that puts you into the normal range." Let's say you're 350, and low is considered 300 or whatever.
I mean, that's the nice thing about hormone replacement, is there's no hard and fast rule of you have to be below a certain range. However, there are also the people who run fast and loose of, "Hey, you're at 600, 700. Let's put you at 1,300." And I don't think that's the right answer.
But I think sometimes, yeah, I've given people that opportunity to see how it's beneficial. The difficult part, then, is to get somebody who can honestly assess it and say, "Yes, this has really been beneficial," or in Scot's case where he was like, "I really didn't see a benefit."
And I think that's where you've got to have that open, honest conversation of, "How is this really going to benefit you and help you?" I've done that plenty of times. I don't think that's a bad thing to do, but I also think it's getting people to actually get out and exercise.
The thing I tell patients all the time is testosterone is not this magic shot, magic pill, magic cream, whatever, that the second you start taking it, you're going to wake up in the morning and go, "I need to be at the gym."
Mitch: It's not. One hundred percent it's not.
Dr. Smith: The same motivation you had to play video games is the same motivation you're going to have to play video games whether you're on testosterone or not. It's not going to change your motivation.
Now, it may change your energy level where you could go to the gym and work out, but you still . . . And that's where all these other things come in. If you've been in kind of a funk and you're like, "Things have been difficult and whatever," you've got to just get yourself to go and do those things.
And a lot of times, I think if people would do that, that have normal testosterone, they would notice the benefits of exercise. They would notice the benefits of a lot of those things that really would kind of turn things, and they'd go, "Oh, man, I feel pretty good."
Scot: I have a couple things, and then I want to talk about . . . We've talked a lot about testosterone for people who are experiencing energy issues, lack of energy, but let's talk about the sexual performance part of it and what you find helps men in that aspect when testosterone is not the issue.
But before we get there, I think part of the other frustration is when you tell somebody, or when I hear, "Oh, you just need to eat better or exercise more," that can take some time to start feeling the benefits of those things. And maybe those benefits come so slowly you don't really notice them as they're coming. It's like the putting the frog in the water before it's boiling. You don't notice that heat. You don't notice the changes.
Do you find that to be the case? Does it take some time? Are the changes kind of so slow, or do you notice both ends of that spectrum?
Dr. Smith: I see both. Obviously, the people who see the really wham bam impressions come back and they're like, "Man, I feel like myself again. I could play high school football again, whatever." And then you've got the people who come back and they're like, "I don't feel that much better, but I'm going to keep doing it because I think it's helping."
And then they come back and I say, "Let's honestly retrospectively look at your activity level and your ability to recover from six months ago." And they go, "It's much, much better." They're able to kind of objectively look back and say, "Yeah, this all pans out." And so, yeah, I get to see both sides.
But again, we live in a culture now where I can turn on my television and I can watch anything I want whenever I want. I don't have to wait for the song on the radio that I think sucks to be gone before I can move on. I can just go to my playlist and play something that I want to listen to. I can switch. And I think we look for those quick answers.
There's nothing wrong with that. I think that's a society we live in, is this fast-paced, "get in, get out" society, when in reality some of these changes take a lot more time than maybe we're used to given our current culture.
And so, yeah, I think sometimes you've got to be patient with yourself and realize that the little bit that you're doing now, six months down the road, if you took a picture of yourself every week at the changes in your body as you started working out, you would go, "Holy cow."
It's kind of like that thing when you haven't seen somebody for a couple years and they've lost some weight or gained some weight or whatever. And you look at him and you go, "Man, he looks way different than before." But if you'd have seen him every single day, you probably wouldn't have said that.
Scot: Yeah. And we had an episode where we talked about reevaluating. How are you evaluating successes when you make those types of changes in your life, like nutrition and exercise? It might not be, "Now all of a sudden you've got the beach body." It might be now, "Oh, wait, when I go in and try to do just a hang," which the internet tells me is a pretty good thing to do, where you just hang on a pull-up bar and kind of stretch out, "I can do it twice as long as I could three months ago."
Your health and your physical ability have improved. That might not seem like much, and it might not be something you're going to brag about on the internet, but it is a positive change.
The other thing I think that's important to bring up here is that testosterone does not improve your health. I mean, in the case where Mitch was then able to exercise, he decided he wanted to and he got a plan and he stuck to it and those hormonal changes did help him stick to it. That doesn't improve your health. That's accurate. However, we know that improving your diet and improving your activity level does improve your health even if you don't see that.
Dr. Smith: Right. And again, testosterone is going to help optimize your body to be able to do what it's going to do. But if you're not giving it the right fuel, you're not giving it anything . . .
I mean, you think about it like a car. If you put a new exhaust on your car, it may help some of those things, but it's not going to make the engine run any smoother and it's not going to fill the tank up with gas. It's going to give you some performance, but it's not going to do what your car wasn't doing before, if that makes sense.
Scot: Your analogies are the best, by the way.
Dr. Smith: I'm glad you appreciate them. But in reality, you're right. A lot of times, if you put good food in your body and then you get the desire to exercise and to put yourself in a good space to be healthy, you're going to see that benefit down the line.
Scot: Yep. And it's small changes and the consistency, stuff we've talked about in different episodes. It doesn't have to be a major change.
And to the time thing, I've been consistent with strength training. I have not been pushing myself super hard. But I've been consistent twice a week, one-hour sessions for seven months. And finally now I'm starting to notice some of those changes. So it doesn't necessarily always happen fast.
But the way I keep myself going is I'm like, "Doing this is better for my health than not doing it." So even if I don't notice anything, I know that something is happening for the positive.
Let's get to this other aspect of some of the symptoms some people might come in for, and that is their sexual performance. What do you notice there if you've got a guy that's got normal testosterone, but sexual performance is the concern?
Dr. Smith: So testosterone is actually not known to improve erectile quality. It will improve libido, or your sex drive, your desire for sex. But it's not noted to be this great change of erectile quality.
And so a lot of men come in and they're like, "I have erectile problems and I have low testosterone." Well, I look at those as two separate problems. Might the testosterone help your erections? Sure. But it might also do nothing. And so a lot of times we have those discussions with people.
Erectile dysfunction and sexual performance and those types of things, there's a lot that kind of goes into that. But getting a general idea of people's sexual health and those types of things is important.
And then discussing if they have a desire to improve things, whether they want to try to do that naturally or if they want to try medications and things like that.
There's a lot of nuance there. Sometimes people have just gone through a rough patch or a breakup in a relationship and their confidence is down. And so their erectile quality is not what it normally would've been. And all they need is a short-term use of medication to help them get their confidence back. Sometimes they have vascular issues from diabetes or heart disease.
So there's a lot of nuance there and things you kind of have to parse out. But again, finding someone that you can ask the right questions to and get the answers that you're looking for is what I would recommend.
Scot: And as far as desire, I mean, that could be a lot of different things too. That could be a statement of the relationship with your partner. It could be mental health issues. It could come back to diet and nutrition. Is that correct?
Dr. Smith: Absolutely. I mean, all those things factor in. Life. If you're worried about a parent that's in the hospital and they may pass soon, you're likely not focused on intercourse as much as you may have been during a newlywed period.
And so, yeah, a lot of those things in life. You've got huge deadlines at work. You've got pressures. A lot of those things play roles in your desire for sexual activity at different times in your life.
Scot: And I think the testosterone industry has done such a great job of saying, "This is the panacea. This is the pill that's going to change at all." Right? And sometimes that's just not the case.
Dr. Smith: Oh, they're brilliant. Now, do I think that testosterone can be very helpful? Absolutely. I mean, listen to Mitch and listen to all the people who have low testosterone who get replacement/supplementation and then they feel really, really good about themselves. I mean, there's a reason. You've got all these people who are out there ready to go knock on doors and tell people the beauty of testosterone because it changed their life. But it's not always what's causing the problem.
Scot: So if you're one of the guys who was hoping that maybe testosterone . . . I guess I chose those words very specifically because I was one of those guys. I was hoping that the testosterone was going to be what was going to help me with what was ailing me.
But then you find out you're well within the normal range, as Dr. Smith explained. For the most part, research doesn't support that going above that range helps. Although sometimes it might, right? I mean, that's the nuance of why you want to have a professional.
Just know that there are things you can do and your doctor should start diving in a little bit more deeply as opposed to just saying, "Well, testosterone is fine. Have a good day."
Dr. Smith: Yeah. Exactly.
Scot: And if you don't have a doctor that's doing that, then you probably should find somebody. I think we like to, as men, make things simple too, right? And it's a lot more nuanced than that.
All right. Let's go ahead and wrap this up. Mitch, what are your takeaways from this episode?
Mitch: It's to tell myself and remind myself that sometimes it is the simple things like diet, exercise, sleep, and mental health, and not always testosterone. But that doesn't mean you shouldn't know your body and find a professional that you can work with to find out where your testosterone actually is.
Scot: I think mine is the same as when I came in. It's just that if you go in and testosterone is the cause and you get on treatment, great. And if that helps you, great. But if you're just kind of right in where you need to be, just be open and honest with yourself about those other things that Dr. Smith discussed.
Find a physician that you can talk through those things with. Sometimes just the process of having those conversations can really help you better understand and also be more honest with yourself.
And I think know that there is hope. So if you went to a primary care physician and they said, "Nope, you're good," that conversation needs to continue with either that person or someone. I think maybe that's it. That conversation needs to continue if you find yourself in that average range.
Dr. Smith, do you have any last things you'd like to add?
Dr. Smith: I think you nailed it. I think being open to testosterone being the thing, great. And if it's not, be open to looking at those avenues that are going to give you what you want.
Ultimately, you're there to improve the fatigue, to improve the brain fog, to improve whatever symptoms you're having, and allowing yourself the opportunity to find a way to improve your situation is always there and always available. And finding the right person to help work with you on that is imperative.
So I agree with all that completely, and I think that those are wise words for patients to really take in and say, "Hey, these are things that could change my life. And if it's not testosterone, I am willing to explore other options." Sometimes that is a hard thing to hear, is that it's not the thing we thought it was.
Scot: Right. Explore other options, and then sometimes it's also not going to be as easy as a pill.
Dr. Smith: Right.
Scot: You might have to change some lifestyle stuff, which can be hard and difficult.
Dr. Smith: The Core Four aren't a pill, and they are the things that will change your life.
Scot: And if you need help with that, ask for that as well. Don't just think that it's easy to start exercising when that's not something you've done, or easy to start eating healthier when that's something you haven't done. You can ask for help for those things as well.
Hit our back library. We talk about all those issues on past episodes of "Who Cares About Men's Health."
If you'd like to reach out and comment on this episode, or have a story you'd like to share, it's easy to do so. Email us hello@thescoperadio.com.
Thanks for listening. Thanks for caring about men's health.
Connect with 'Who Cares About Men's Health'
Email: hello@thescoperadio.com
thescoperadio.com
whocaresmenshealth.com
Lifestyle Changes That Can Increase Testosterone Levels in Older Men
Testosterone levels drop with age, but medication is not your only option. Urologist James Hotaling, MD, shares evidence-backed strategies that can help men boost their testosterone naturally.
The Connection Between Diabetes and Erectile Dysfunction
Believe it or not, erectile dysfunction can be a symptom of diabetes. In fact, half of men diagnosed with diabetes experience erectile dysfunction within 10 years of their diagnosis.
Know Your BPH Risk Factors
At some point in their lives, nearly all men will experience some degree of prostate enlargement. Understanding the risk factors can help you be proactive with your health and potentially...
Should You Worry About Swollen Testicles?
Understanding what a swollen testicle means and how to treat it can go a long way to easing the mind and fixing the problem.Keck Medicine of USC men’s health specialist Kian Asanad, MD, answers commonly asked questions about the risks and benefits of testosterone replacement therapy.
As women go through menopause, some men may go through a similar experience called andropause, which results from a decrease in their natural testosterone production. There are many therapies on the market for men in this stage of life, but the only one meant to be prescribed and monitored by a doctor is testosterone replacement therapy.
While general awareness and understanding of testosterone replacement therapy has improved in recent years, many people still have questions. Is testosterone replacement therapy safe? What are the side effects of testosterone replacement therapy? How is testosterone replacement therapy different from over-the-counter drugs and supplements?
Kian Asanad, MD, a urologist specializing in men’s health at USC Urology, part of Keck Medicine of USC, answers these questions and more.
How do you know if you have low testosterone?
Some studies suggest that testosterone begins to dip between the ages of 40 and 60, and the most common symptoms include:
- Low energy.
- Impaired sexual desire and performance issues.
- Depression or brain fog.
- Loss of muscle mass.
However, other conditions, such as underlying depression or stress, can also cause these symptoms.
“It’s a good idea to see a doctor for a two-part blood test to confirm the diagnosis,” Dr. Asanad says.
He adds that newer studies have demonstrated that it is actually the accumulation of other medical problems as men get older (such as diabetes, high blood pressure, obesity and metabolic syndrome) that results in decreased testosterone levels. In other words, if men stay healthy as they get older, they can maintain normal testosterone levels as they age.
Why not just take an over-the-counter remedy?
Over-the-counter testosterone remedies commonly advertised on TV are mainly vitamin and herbal supplements. However, a prior study has found that some of these supplements actually do contain testosterone or testosterone precursors, which should only be taken under a doctor’s supervision.
“Exogenous testosterone therapy can make men infertile and lower their sperm counts,” Dr. Asanad says. “So, if a 35-year-old man is thinking, ‘I need an energy booster’ and starts taking a testosterone therapy from the plethora of online direct-to-consumer platforms available, it could seriously affect their fertility. Without appropriate counseling, they may not be aware that their sperm count has gone down.”
He adds, “In cases where men want to preserve their fertility potential, I recommend alternative testosterone therapies, such as clomiphene citrate, which help boost natural testosterone production.”
Does testosterone replacement therapy cause cancer?
“No,” Dr. Asanad says. “An FDA study has concluded that testosterone replacement therapy does not increase a patient’s risk of developing prostate cancer.”
That doesn’t mean everyone can or should use it, though.
“If someone is currently living with low-risk prostate cancer or they had a history of prostate cancer and it has been completely treated, testosterone replacement therapy is more nuanced and complex. This should typically only be prescribed and monitored by their urologist,” Dr. Asanad says.
How is testosterone replacement therapy administered?
Testosterone replacement therapyis most commonly given as a topical gel or an injection, though “there’s also pellet therapy and newer oral testosterone agents,” Dr. Asanad says. As a result, men can choose whatever form of therapy best suits their lifestyle.
What if I’m too embarrassed to ask for it?
Dr. Asanad wants every patient to know that a urologist’s office “is a very safe space.” There’s not much your urologist hasn’t seen.
He adds, “Many men suffer from low testosterone, and it can significantly impact their quality of life.”
The good news is, low testosterone is easily treated, with many different options available to suit each patient’s unique needs and life goals.
TopicsDo you have the features of Testosterone Deficiency? Take our ADAM screening questionnaire so we can get to understand your symptoms
The Androgen Deficiency in Aging Males (ADAM) questionnaire is an easy way to answer questions about your health, which can help to see if you need your testosterone level checked.
It is an internationally accredited assessment tool which is often used by doctors when making the assessment and diagnosis of Testosterone Deficiency. A positive result does not necessarily mean that you have a low testosterone level or require treatment, but can be a helpful guide when discussing your symptoms with your doctor.
Please answer the questions below:
Speak to our team, book online or email us with any questions that you may have.If you are an adult male, it’s normal as you get older to have less testosterone in your body. The male sex hormone testosterone plays a critical role in, among other things, sexual desire and arousal. Therefore, it’s not surprising that as men experience decreases in testosterone levels, one of the noticeable effects they experience is decreased sex drive and increased sexual function issues.
This can lead many men to seek out treatments and therapies, such as testosterone replacement therapy, to attempt to regain the same kind of sex drive, stamina, and so on that they had in their youth. Alternatives to testosterone replacement therapy, such as lifestyle modifications, dietary changes, and herbal supplements, may also be considered by those seeking to address age-related changes in testosterone levels.
One of the medically-approved ways to improve testosterone levels is with testosterone replacement therapy. However, this is not usually prescribed for age-related testosterone loss, but rather for low testosterone levels caused by other medical conditions or pathologies. It comes with great risks for many patients as well. The good news is there are several other therapies available, all of which work in different ways. Some have a high degree of risk associated with them or are considered off-label use. Others may boost libido, sex drive, and sexual performance capabilities with little risk.
Below, we’ll briefly talk about testosterone replacement therapy, and then examine some of the alternatives to testosterone replacement therapy that men should consider for similar or better outcomes with fewer side effects or risks.
Table of Contents
Testosterone Loss Due To Aging
Most men are aware that their testosterone levels naturally decrease over time as they age. This is backed up by science – on average, from the time men reach their mid- to late-30s, their levels of testosterone production drop by around 1% per year, or 10% per decade (Feldman et al, 2002). This is one of the contributing factors to a decrease in libido, increase in sexual function issues and erectile dysfunction, and the associated psychological and relationship issues that can develop in men as they age. Despite this, it’s considered a normal part of aging. But, that doesn’t mean that men have to simply accept this change, and can’t do anything about it.
There are a variety of treatments as well as lifestyle changes that can be made to boost energy levels, libido, stamina, and related traits. The first and most direct is by boosting testosterone levels with testosterone replacement therapy. That comes with a lot of risks, however, and while we won’t go into great detail here, we’ve covered those risks and side effects in separate articles on testosterone replacement therapy.
Testosterone Replacement Therapy Is Not Usually Prescribed For Age-Related Loss
Even for men who consider the risks associated with testosterone replacement therapy to be worthwhile, it may not be that simple. In most cases, doctors will not prescribe or consent to testosterone replacement therapy simply for age-related testosterone decline. It’s almost exclusively reserved for treating what is formally known as hypogonadism – an abnormally low testosterone level for the patient’s age, often resulting from medical conditions, illnesses, disease, congenital disabilities, or other endogenous causes.
Testosterone replacement therapy usually consists of a gel, injection, implanted capsule, or another mechanism for allowing the testosterone to be absorbed into the body and boost circulating testosterone levels. Each of the various methods used for testosterone replacement therapy has its own risk/reward profiles, on top of the inherent risks associated with testosterone replacement therapy. In general, simply supplying replacement hormones to the body is seen as high risk, whether in the form of testosterone or any other substances that are so critical for so many biological processes (Osterberg et al. 2014).
Other Sex Hormone Treatments
There are other sex hormone treatments, which aim to improve testosterone levels directly or indirectly, but without using testosterone itself. These have varying evidence for their efficacy, and only the first highlighted below is used for treating hypogonadism. In all cases, none of these treatment options are considered approved or on-label for boosting testosterone levels that have declined due to aging. That can make them difficult to impossible for most men to obtain explicitly for that purpose. For more information on these specific treatments, to discuss with your doctor, you can read this excellent literature review paper on the topic.
Human Chorionic Gonadotropin
Human chorionic gonadotropin, or hCG, is a compound that is found within the placenta of pregnant women, and is chemically homologous to lutenizing hormone. This hormone plays important roles during the fetal development, triggering, among other things, testosterone production in male babies. It has been shown to be effective in stimulating testosterone production in a certain class of cells within the testes of adult men suffering from hypogonadism.
However, as with most of these treatments, it is not generally prescribed or approved for age-related testosterone loss. The long-term safety and health risks associated with hCG therapy have not been well-established. Unlike pure testosterone replacement therapy, however, hCG has been shown to maintain or trigger the production of sperm, allowing men to retain their fertility – something that is often inhibited in testosterone replacement therapies.
Aromatase Inhibitors
Aromatase is an enzyme that is responsible for breaking down testosterone into estradiol in the body. Aromatase inhibitors, as their name suggests, inhibits the action of this enzyme. This results in both direct and indirect increases in the testosterone levels in the body. Though effective, this treatment for testosterone therapy is considered off-label use. Treatment for low testosterone has been shown to cause side effects, including hot flashes, weight gain, insomnia, joint aches, low bone mineral density/osteoporosis, and similar problems. On the upside, they are available via oral medications, rather than injection or other application methods common to most other forms of treatment. Long-term use for low testosterone and the associated side effects and risks have not been established.
Selective Estrogen Receptor Modulators
Selective estrogen receptor modulators, or SERMs, act as either antagonists or agonists on estrogen receptors (tissue-dependent). For our purposes, they act as estrogen receptor antagonists in the pituitary gland and hypothalamus, and thus prevent the normal inhibitory effects of estrogen on other sex hormones. The net result is an increase in testosterone levels, with spermatogenesis stimulated as well. It is currently used as an off-label medication for the treatment of hypogonadism.
Much like our other treatments, however, it is not typically prescribed for age-related testosterone loss treatment. Specifically, clomiphene citrate is usually used for this purpose, and provided in oral pills of 25 mg or 50 mg strength daily. Typical side effects include headache, dizziness, and fatigue. Long-term risks and side effects have not been established. Higher dosages may result in lower sperm counts, however.
Lifestyle Changes
Non-medication treatment options for low testosterone, both naturally-occurring from aging and occurring due to other medical pathologies, are also viable. These can work whether or not you are on testosterone replacement therapy or one of our alternative options. Many of the following lifestyle changes have been shown to not only increase testosterone production and libido, but provide numerous other benefits as well. In many cases, however, it is not clear if the lifestyle change alone results in the positive benefits, or serves to reduce or modify other health and medical conditions themselves, which then provide the benefits. In any case, these lifestyle changes include:
- Eating a healthy, well-balanced diet. This is key to maintaining a healthy weight, low body fat percentage, and sufficient lean muscle mass. Additionally, it is essential to managing potential health conditions that develop with age and reducing your risk for them. Obesity, diabetes, and similar conditions can depress libido and decrease testosterone levels in the body.
- Exercising regularly throughout your life. Adults need 2 to 3 hours of moderate exercise each week to remain healthy. Staying active increases muscle mass, helps keep weight in check, boosts the immune system, and can help increase testosterone production in men.
- Get 7 to 8 hours of good quality, restful sleep every night. Sleep plays a key role in regulating all of the hormones and their production in your body, and that includes the sex hormones.
- Address any underlying health problems and/or medication side effects with your doctor. Many medical conditions and medication side effects can result in decreased testosterone or depressed sexual function.
- Address any mental health and/or relationship issues with professionals, as these can artificially depress your libido and may be the cause of sexual health issues rather than any physical problem.
- Vitamin D has been shown to increase testosterone production, so be sure you are getting sufficient vitamin D in your diet or through supplements (around 3,300 IUs daily) (Pilz et al., 2010).
- Caffeine in moderation has been shown to boost testosterone, so have an extra cup of coffee each day.
- Low zinc levels can cause low testosterone, so be sure to take a supplement or multivitamin that includes your recommended daily intake of zinc (Prasad et al., 1996).
Treatment with a Non-Testosterone Option: Enclomiphene
There is one treatment option that stands apart from traditional testosterone replacement therapies—it doesn’t introduce external testosterone into the body. Instead, it works by stimulating your body’s own natural testosterone production. This medication is called Enclomiphene, a selective estrogen receptor modulator (SERM) that’s gaining popularity as a non-hormonal alternative to TRT.
Enclomiphene increases natural testosterone by blocking estrogen receptors in the brain, which prompts the pituitary gland to produce more luteinizing hormone (LH) and follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH). These hormones, in turn, stimulate the testes to produce testosterone. This approach preserves fertility and avoids the common suppression of the hypothalamic-pituitary-gonadal (HPG) axis that occurs with direct testosterone therapy.
Because Enclomiphene works with your body’s hormonal signaling rather than overriding it, it may carry fewer long-term risks and side effects than traditional TRT. Many users report benefits such as improved energy, mood, libido, muscle mass, cognitive function, and sperm production—all without the need for external testosterone.
Concluding Thoughts on Alternatives to Testosterone Replacement Therapy
Several alternatives to testosterone replacement therapy are available, each with its own pros and cons. While many hormonal treatments carry potential side effects and involve off-label use, Enclomiphene stands out as a safe, effective, and fertility-preserving option. By enhancing your body’s own ability to produce testosterone, it offers a more natural path to restoring vitality, libido, and overall well-being.The male population in this country is living longer. An estimated 30 million men in the United States - 12 to 13 percent of the current population - are 65 and older. Over the next few decades, this figure will rise to 60 million, or 25 percent of the population. Longer life often brings decreased testicular function and, accordingly, lower testosterone production.
Numerous studies have shown that blood levels of testosterone decrease in conjunction with the aging process: 8 percent of men have low testosterone when they are in their 40s-60s, 22 percent when in their 60s-80s, and more than 40 percent when they are over 80 years of age.
Symptoms
Aging brings symptoms that include decreased sex drive (libido), depression, loss of stamina, loss of bone density, loss of muscle mass, and a slowing of thought processes. Certainly, there are other potential causes for some of these symptoms, but when they are accompanied by abnormally low testosterone, this late-onset hypogonadism, currently is referred to as androgen deficiency in the aging male andropause, or ADAM.
Diagnosis
Diagnosis is based on clinical signs and symptoms and blood tests that document low levels of serum testosterone. To distinguish between a primary (testicular) or secondary (pituitary/hypothalamic) cause for the hypogonadism, measurements of serum luteinizing hormone, prolactin, and follicle-stimulating hormone are needed.
Treatment
Treatment is available in injectable, oral and transdermal (skin-patch) form, but oral preparations are least effective and carry a significant risk of liver toxicity. Hormone replacement is recommended only when there is proper laboratory and clinical documentation. Men using testosterone are monitored by their physicians at regular intervals with evaluations that include an assessment of the patient's clinical response, a digital rectal examination, and blood tests for testosterone, hemoglobin and prostate-specific antigen. A lipid profile and liver function test may also be considered.
Benefits of testosterone supplementation may include improvement in any or all of the symptoms described for androgen deficiency in the aging male.Interviewer: Andropause is the male version of menopause. We'll find out more about that next on The Scope.
Announcer: Medical news and research from University of Utah physicians and specialists you can use for a happier and healthier life. You're listening to The Scope.
Interviewer: Dr. Jim Hotaling is a urologist and also a men's health expert here at University of Utah Health Care. Andropause, what is it?
What is Andropause?
Dr. Hotaling: There is a natural decline in testosterone in men after the age of about 30 or 35, testosterone goes down significantly. One of the things that's really tricky is we don't know what the normal testosterone is in a 20 year old, 30 year old, 40 year old, 50 year old. We know maybe in a 50 year old and above what an abnormal testosterone is, which is usually a total testosterone, depending on who you look at, below 350 or below 300.
But again this is a lab test that varies minute to minute and hour to hour and it has to be checked before about 10 in the morning to be accurate. So if a man goes to get their testosterone checked at 4 pm it's almost always going to be low. One thing that's difficult is the testosterone industry has had the most successful marketing campaign in the history of medicine.
So it literally took testosterone from in 2000 being about a $100 million a year industry, I think this year it will clear 2 or 3 billion. It's actually taught at Harvard Business School, the whole concept of low T as exactly how you should do marketing. And a lot of men come in because they're concerned with that. In summary andropause is real, but and this is the big but, you don't treat a number.
You really only treat patients if they have symptoms of low testosterone and have low testosterone. Ideally on one to two measurements in our opinion and everybody's bias, but urologist are great people to do that because they understand a lot of the issues that impact men's health.
What Causes Andropause?
Interviewer: So what exactly is it? Is it just a natural lowering of testosterone? Is that all andropause is?
Dr. Hotaling: Essentially, yes. The testosterone will decline in a man every year past the age of 30 or 35.
Interviewer: And is it the male version of menopause?
Dr. Hotaling: It is in the sense that it's a decrease in hormone levels and everything else. But for women it's a different issue because at some point they stop ovulating. Men really never stop producing sperm. There are people who've produced children in their 90s, which that's a topic for a different day, but men never stop producing sperm.
And it's not as severe as it is in woman. It's a very gradual decline and at some point, in some men, it declines to a point where it does cause symptoms and that is where I think there is some resemblance to menopause.
Interviewer: And that's where you as a urologist or a men's health expert would perhaps then consider doing some sort of therapy?
Testosterone Replacement Therapy & Treatment
Dr. Hotaling: Yeah, that's correct and typically the therapy is testosterone replacement. There are other medications we can use. The downside to testosterone replacement is it will make men sterile, some men permanently. Most men not. But we can use other medications to actually boost testosterone and keep men's' fertility intact.
There are also some surgical procedures, one in particular we can do to actually help increase a man's testosterone.
Is Andropause Normal?
Interviewer: So decreasing testosterone or going through andropause is just normal?
Dr. Hotaling: Yeah, it is normal and I think that's the key thing to understand. The testosterone companies would have you believe that you should treat a number. And what's tricky about testosterone is anyone, no matter what their testosterone starts at, will feel better when you put them on testosterone. That doesn't mean that everybody should be on testosterone and I think that's the real challenge.
Announcer: TheScopeRadio.com is University of Utah Health Sciences Radio. If you like what you heard, be sure to get our latest content by following us on Facebook, just click on the Facebook icon at TheScopeRadio.com.
Lifestyle Changes That Can Increase Testosterone Levels in Older Men
Testosterone levels drop with age, but medication is not your only option. Urologist James Hotaling, MD, shares evidence-backed strategies that can help men boost their testosterone naturally.
The Connection Between Diabetes and Erectile Dysfunction
Believe it or not, erectile dysfunction can be a symptom of diabetes. In fact, half of men diagnosed with diabetes experience erectile dysfunction within 10 years of their diagnosis.
Know Your BPH Risk Factors
At some point in their lives, nearly all men will experience some degree of prostate enlargement. Understanding the risk factors can help you be proactive with your health and potentially...
Should You Worry About Swollen Testicles?
Understanding what a swollen testicle means and how to treat it can go a long way to easing the mind and fixing the problem.Are testosterone-boosting supplements effective? Not likely, according to new research
Over-the-counter “T boosters” are a popular choice for men looking to raise their testosterone levels, and are frequently marketed as being an effective “natural” option. However, new research points toward these supplements as having little or no known ef
Men who want to improve their libido or build body mass may want to think twice before using testosterone-boosting supplements — also known as “T boosters” — as research shows these alternatives to traditional testosterone replacement therapy may not have ingredients to support their claims, according to Mary K. Samplaski, MD, assistant professor of clinical urology at the Keck School of Medicine of USC.
“Many supplements on the market merely contain vitamins and minerals, but don’t do anything to improve testosterone,” Samplaski said. “Often, people can be vulnerable to the marketing component of these products, making it difficult to tease out what is myth and what is reality.”
Testosterone is the primary male sex hormone and the reason why men produce sperm and have Adam’s apples. It’s also why men develop more “masculine” features like bulging muscles, a deep voice, broad shoulders and a hairy chest. After age 30, most men experience a gradual decline in testosterone, sometimes causing these features to diminish or new symptoms to occur, like erectile dysfunction. In an attempt to turn back the hands of time, some men will turn to T boosters.
Using a structured review approach, Samplaski and a team of researchers explored the active ingredients and advertised claims of 50 T boosting supplements. Their findings were published as an original article in The World Journal of Men’s Health.
Researchers performed a Google search with the search term “Testosterone Booster,” thus mimicking a typical internet research for someone looking to increase testosterone levels, and then selected the first 50 products that came up in their search. Then, the team reviewed published scientific literature on testosterone and the 109 components found in the supplements. Zinc, fenugreek extract and vitamin B6 were three of the most common components in the supplements.
The team also compared the content for each supplement with the Food and Drug Administration’s (FDA) Recommended Daily Allowance (RDA) and the upper tolerable intake level (UL) as set by the Institute of Medicine of the National Academy of Sciences.
Of the 150 supplements, researchers came across 16 general claims to benefit patients, including claims to “boost T or free T”, “build body lean mass or muscle mass”, or “increase sex drive or libido.”
While 90% of the T booster supplements claimed to boost testosterone, researchers found that less than 25% of the supplements had data to support their claims. Many also contained high doses of vitamins and minerals, occasionally more than the tolerable limit.
Unlike drugs, supplements are not intended to treat, diagnose, prevent, or cure diseases, according to the FDA. As such, Samplaski would like to see more regulation around testosterone-boosting supplements to protect consumers. She also would like to explore disseminating handouts to her patients with more accurate information in the hopes that it encourages patients to seek a medical professional for low testosterone issues.
While no one can escape the effects of aging, Samplaski said there is something men can do to address their concerns. “The safest and most effective way for men to boost low testosterone levels is to talk with a medical professional or a nutritionist.”
— Elyse BlyeAre You Making These 7 TRT Mistakes?
Testosterone Replacement Therapy helps thousands of men improve their sex drive, regain their body composition, boost their mood, and more.
But hormones are complex, and it’s important to avoid making mistakes when you start a TRT protocol.
We’ll go over the top seven TRT mistakes to avoid as you consider Testosterone Replacement Therapy.
1. Using illegitimate sources for Testosterone.
TRT is a medical therapy to treat low Testosterone (also called hypogonadism) in men. TRT plans should always be overseen by a provider, and medications should come from reliable pharmacies that adhere to FDA regulations.
Legally, Testosterone cannot be purchased without a prescription, and selling Testosterone without oversight is against the law. There is no quality guarantee for medications purchased from black market vendors. These medications may be dangerous, improperly packaged and stored, include harmful additives like heavy metals, and more.
On top of that, hormones are a delicate balance. Providers who specialize in TRT understand how to create a plan that optimizes Testosterone while considering the ways TRT impacts the body. A medical-guided plan can help you avoid side effects, plus make sure your plan is optimized to your needs.
Injecting Testosterone without the guidance of a provider can lead to overuse, aggressive peaks and crashes, excessive hair loss and acne, physiological damage, mood swings, and more.
2. Cycling on and off Testosterone.
One of the biggest Testosterone myths is that you need to “cycle” – or stop taking Testosterone periodically to give your body a break.
TRT is an ongoing therapy with dosages taken at regular intervals. A consistent schedule keeps Testosterone levels balanced and elevated over time.
On a provider-guided TRT plan, there is no need to stop taking Testosterone. Doing so can interrupt your progress and cause low T symptoms to resurface. Cycling can also cause uncomfortable peaks and lows in your Testosterone levels.
If you need to stop TRT permanently for whatever reason, a knowledgeable provider can guide you through halting therapy and restarting your HPTA axis. Learn more about Defy Medical’s HPTA Axis restart protocol.
3. Not knowing your TRT options.
There are more TRT options than you may think. The most common form of TRT is injection therapy, but others include:
- Topical gels and creams
- Implantable pellets
- Supplemental nasal application
- Combination therapies as appropriate
The right TRT plan for you will depend on several factors. One factor is your comfort level with the application process. Injections may not be a great idea if you fear needles, for example.
Each delivery system has different pros and cons, as well.
Testosterone injections allow for quick adjustment of hormone levels, and many patients find them to be the most efficient delivery system.
Topical Testosterone allows patients to avoid injections, but absorption takes place over time, which may or may not work depending on your lifestyle.
Implantable pellets don’t require daily or weekly application, but it can take a few months to find the right protocol to balance hormones, since bodies metabolize the implanted Testosterone differently.
You should work with a knowledgeable provider who can explain all of your options to you. A customized plan that suits your needs, goals, and lifestyle will work best for optimizing your Testosterone levels.
4. Not having an individualized TRT protocol.
As we’ve said, hormones are complex, and each patient responds differently to treatment. This means you need an individualized plan to reach optimal Testosterone levels.
Often, insurance-funded TRT plans with traditional providers aren’t customized enough. Dosages are typically fixed, rather than adjusted to the individual, and application schedules may be too infrequent to be effective.
Defy Medical offers TRT plans that are tailored to your needs and response to treatment. Dosage and application frequency depend on what works for you, which we measure based on lab results and consultations that monitor your symptoms.
5. Not working with a provider who offers regular follow-up.
To optimize Testosterone levels effectively, your provider should review your blood work and response to treatment every 3-6 months and make adjustments as necessary.
It often takes time to find the right TRT protocol, and following up ensures your treatment is customized. Your response to treatment may shift as you age, as well. Following up regularly helps you stay on top of these shifts, so your TRT works long-term.
Defy Medical offers regular follow-up with routine lab work, so we know exactly how you’re responding to treatment.
6. Not making lifestyle changes to optimize your results.
TRT eases Low T symptoms to help men feel better, have more energy, build muscle while burning fat, and more. But these benefits are compounded when you also make lifestyle changes to support your protocol.
Taking illicit drugs, smoking, drinking excessively, and engaging in other substance use can affect Testosterone levels. Addressing these lifestyle factors can help boost your TRT results, plus improve your overall health.
Obesity, diabetes, high blood pressure, high blood sugar, and other issues can affect your T levels, as well. Adding regular exercise and healthy eating to your TRT plan often leads to better results.
7. Not sticking to your TRT plan.
TRT requires regular administration of Testosterone.
Topical Testosterone is typically applied daily, while Testosterone injections are injected once to three times a week. Pellets need to be implanted during an in-office procedure every 4-6 months.
To see results, it’s crucial to stick to your plan and apply your medication on schedule. If you skip doses, your TRT protocol won’t be effective at balancing your levels. You may experience the return of low T symptoms, as well as symptoms associated with irregular hormone levels.
If you struggle to take medications consistently, you can try setting an alarm on your phone or in your calendar to remind you.
TRT with Defy Medical
Defy Medial is an industry-leading Men’s Health clinic that has helped thousands of patients achieve healthier, more active lives. Read more about our patient success stories.
Our team has worked in the field of HRT and Men’s Health for more than a decade, and we bring this experience to you via convenient telemedicine and easy online ordering of medications. We offer comprehensive hormone therapy to help you feel your best.
Ready to learn more?
Get StartedLast summer, my 44-year-old brother-in-law, a tall guy who works for a power company and owns cows for fun, started having the sweats. “I don’t know what the problem is,” he complained, wiping his sweat-shiny face. “It’s male menopause!” joked his mother. The rest of us laughed.
But I was curious. Is there such a thing as “male menopause”? Google responded with a walloping yes. But you and I both know that just because people have published a million articles about something on the internet doesn’t make it so. For a dose of reality, I turned to Ryan Smith, MD, a urologist here at UVA whose daily job is to help men with their hormones.
The Rise and Fall of Testosterone
Male menopause, while not exactly an actual medical term, “is a known entity,” he said. In fact, hormonal changes tend to begin in all men in their early 30s. That’s when testosterone levels start to drop at a rate of about 1-2 percent a year.
Low testosterone, or low T, Smith says, “is one of the most common things I see men for.”
So, why is female menopause so well known, yet we don’t have a similar concept for men? Both sexes experience a drop in hormone production as they grow older. However, the speed of the hormone level changes and their impacts differ between the sexes.
As with puberty, women universally experience a more drastic hormone shift (menstruation, menopause). The rise and fall of sex hormone levels in men occurs more gradually, with less obvious changes. That difference results in a lot of misunderstandings about hormones in men and what they do.
Most men aren’t even aware that low testosterone levels can affect their health. “When men come in feeling tired, unable to concentrate, having sexual concerns, and we diagnose them with low T, they’re shocked,” Smith notes.
Hypogonadism in Men
In men, low T often masks a more serious condition: hypogonadism. Caused by genetics, testicular problems, autoimmune issues, pituitary tumors or disease, hypogonadism causes abnormally low testosterone levels. By age 45, 40 percent of men have abnormally low testosterone levels.
Hypogonadism can cause quite disruptive results:
- Decreased libido
- Erectile dysfunction
- Decreased volume of ejaculate
- Loss of body and facial hair
- Weakness
- Decreased bone density
- Decreased lean body mass
- Increased body fat
- Anemia
While the onset of symptoms can closely resemble the intensity of menopause, calling this condition male menopause or andropause is inaccurate. “We diagnose people with hypogonadism or low T, and treat them appropriately,” Smith says.
We ALL Have Gonads
Fun fact: Although the slang term “nads” is used for males, in actuality, both men and women have “gonads.” The term refers to the glands that produce sex hormones (women have ovaries, men have testes, and both generate testosterone.) Both sexes can experience hypogonadism when their hormone levels fall below normal.
The Effects of Low-T
Whatever the cause, reduced testosterone can have serious negative health impacts, increasing men’s risk for osteoporosis, diabetes, obesity, COPD, prostate disease and hypertension.
“Testosterone has myriad things it impacts,” Smith explains. “If you don’t treat men with low T, they can have worse heart and bone density outcomes.” Together with Justin Smith, MD, a UVA psychiatrist, Smith currently runs a study looking into the relationship of low T and depression. “We’re looking at the overlap. There’s a close tie-in that is incompletely understood right now.”
But Smith doesn’t go right to handing out testosterone therapy to patients with low T symptoms. “When a man comes in, the first thing we do is counsel him, especially if it appears he hasn’t taken care of himself, such as not exercising or obesity. We encourage him to lose weight, see a nutritionist, get regular exercise. Getting healthy can reverse the process of decline.”
For men willing and able to diet and exercise, Smith says, they can bring up their baseline testosterone levels. “And they come out of a range of needing therapy to one where they don’t.”
Treating Low T: 3 Barriers
But getting men in for treatment generally proves challenging. First of all, most men don’t often go to the doctor. “Men are 25 percent less likely to see a doctor than a woman,” Smith says. “We are ourselves the biggest barrier. We see it as – we don’t need the doctor. We’re not advocates for our health.”
Hormone Therapy for Men: Fears & No Data
A second, and perhaps more problematic, barrier arose a few years ago with the release of studies showing an increased risk of heart attack and stroke in men on low-T therapy. In reaction, the FDA produced a severe warning regarding the use of testosterone products.
“This made doctors uneasy. That being said, there’s a lot of data predating that warning – and also data following – that shows less of a risk when men are diagnosed, followed and treated appropriately. While low-T therapy remains controversial, most of us feel that warning wasn’t a fair assessment. We need more data.”
Smith remembers, too, that at the time a number of doctors tended to over-prescribe testosterone, causing a rash of side effects.
Today, Smith and the other urologists at UVA approach hormone therapy as they do any drug. “We do the due diligence to treat and monitor according to national guidelines. We tell them the risks of therapy and counsel them appropriately about how the FDA has made warning statements.” What matters? “The right diagnosis.”
Anyway You Want It: Ways to Treat “Male Menopause”
Hormone therapy for men comes in a variety of forms. You can choose from:
- Gels
- Injections
- Patches
- Nasal spray
- Pellets
Testosterone Online
A third barrier to getting the proper therapy: Men self-medicate with testosterone obtained online. Whether suffering from low T or not, some men take testosterone out of the mistaken belief that it’s a wonder drug. And this can have unwanted results.
“Some think it’s an age-reversing drug – takes men back to age 18. It’s not the fountain of youth, as some men think,” Smith says, referring to those who, in search of youth and strength, buy unregulated testosterone online. “You get a big rise in testosterone from these injections,” Smith explains. “But only for a couple of days. Then you crash, a rollercoaster effect. This can suppress your normal hormonal process and cause permanent problems to your pituitary gland and fertility.”
It’s not surprising men try to self-medicate. “The symptoms are somewhat widespread, even without a diagnosis of low T,” he says. “A decrease in energy levels, poor exercise tolerance, changes in mood or concentration, sexual dysfunction – you can have all those and have normal hormone levels, even though they tend to be more prevalent in low T.”
Additionally, online “men’s health clinics” providing testosterone do not always get a thorough assessment of a patient’s bloodwork or provide safe doses and types of hormone, Smith notes. Still, “a sizeable portion of men trying to go to the gym and maximize their lifting” buy these online products. Recently, Smith has seen more young men in high school starting on regimens they’ve read about online.
They have no clue about the health ramifications.
The High Stakes of Hormones
Smith emphasizes that he and his colleagues are fellowship-trained, a fact that distinguishes them not only from dubious online clinics, but also from private practices nearby. The causes, effects and risks associated with testosterone can prove complicated and tricky.
One effect most people don’t realize: Being on testosterone can actually suppress male fertility.
Smith says, “I’ve seen young people on it, and it has a contraceptive effect. A lot of primary doctors don’t realize testosterone will suppress fertility. About 7 percent of all male infertility visits are related to testosterone effects.”
Male Menopause: Therapy for Low T
Feeling down, lacking in energy?
See a UVA men’s health expert.
Treat Your Low-T (Really)
The fact is, whether we call it male menopause, andropause or low T, the effects of hormone loss in men can cause just as much suffering and ill health to men as menopause does to women. We need to start encouraging the males in our lives to visit their primary care doctors and, yes, talk about their feelings.
According to Smith, they’ll be glad if they do. He reports that when patients do come in and find out they can blame low testosterone levels for their lethargy and erectile difficulty, they often express relief. “They say, ‘OK, great! Now I know there’s a reason I’ve felt this way.’”Does testosterone therapy raise your risk of getting prostate cancer or having a heart attack? For definitive answers, large-scale, long-term controlled studies are needed, says Arthur L. Burnett, M.D., the Patrick C. Walsh Distinguished Professor of Urology. However, in the meantime, results of a meta-analysis study led by Burnett suggest that, for prostate cancer at least, the risk is not changed by taking extra testosterone.
Testosterone therapy — boosting low testosterone with supplemental medication — is often prescribed for men with low blood levels of testosterone, for symptoms including reduced libido and sexual activity, fewer spontaneous erections, decreased energy and depressed mood. "But controversies surround the role of testosterone therapy, particularly with respect to prostate cancer and cardiovascular health risks, and these concerns have heightened recently," says Burnett.
In an effort to address the prostate cancer side of these worries, Burnett collaborated with Peter Boyle and colleagues of the International Prevention Research Institute in Lyon, France. They pored over data from about 20,000 men who participated in 24 population-based studies that evaluated the association between blood testosterone levels and the risk of prostate cancer. "We found that the risk of prostate cancer was neither increased or decreased among men with high levels of testosterone compared to lower levels," says Burnett. "Also, testosterone therapy was not found to increase prostate specific antigen (PSA) levels, or to promote the occurrence of prostate cancer." The meta-analysis was presented as a prize abstract selection at the Press Program of the American Urological Association 2015 Annual Meeting. Burnett hopes that these findings will be helpful to clinicians and patients who are worried that boosting low testosterone will cause prostate cancer to develop.Buyer Beware: Quick Fixes/Clinics for Low Testosterone and Erectile Dysfunction
Dr. Petar Bajic, the new Director of the Center for Men's Health at Cleveland Clinic, joins the Butts and Guts podcast once again, this time to discuss the rise in direct-to-consumer men's healthcare. Listen to learn more about the risks men face when seeking treatment from standalone clinics or online platforms for conditions like low testosterone (low-T) and erectile dysfunction (ED), along with why it's important for men to inform their urologist about these complications versus seeking care elsewhere.
Subscribe: Apple Podcasts | Podcast Addict | Spotify | Buzzsprout
Buyer Beware: Quick Fixes/Clinics for Low Testosterone and Erectile Dysfunction
Podcast Transcript
Dr. Scott Steele: Butts and Guts, a Cleveland Clinic podcast exploring your digestive and surgical health from end to end.
Dr. Scott Steele: Hi again everyone, and welcome to another episode of Butts and Guts. I'm your host, Scott Steele, the Chair of Colorectal Surgery here at the Cleveland Clinic in beautiful Cleveland, Ohio. It's always my pleasure to welcome back former guests. Today we are welcoming back, Dr. Petar Bajic, having a second time here on Butts and Guts, who is a urologist and men's health expert in Cleveland Clinic's Department of Urology. Petar, welcome to Butts and Guts.
Dr. Petar Bajic: Thanks so much for having me back.
Dr. Scott Steele: Fantastic. And so, today we're going to talk a little bit about direct-to-consumer men's healthcare, something you see all the time. We've had a couple of small tidbits on this, but I'm super excited to delve into the details. But, for those who didn't hear your first time on Butts and Guts, give us a little bit about your background.
Dr. Petar Bajic: Sure. So, I grew up here in Cleveland and did my undergrad at Case and then med school at Toledo, did a urology residency at Loyola University in Chicago, followed by a one-year fellowship in andrology and male genital reconstruction. So, in my practice here, I focus on men's sexual and urinary health. As part of that, I see men with a wide variety of issues. I also see a lot of prostate cancer survivors for their sexual and urinary concerns.
Dr. Scott Steele: Fantastic. And so, today we're going to be talking about the rise in direct-to-consumer men's healthcare. From standalone clinics to online platforms that are gaining popularity amongst men for treatment, it seems like you can't really turn on a television and not see something along the lines of erectile dysfunction. We're also going to be talking a little bit about why some men may be seeking this type of quick fix instead of talking to their urologist about the concerns they have.
So, to start, can you give us a little bit of an overview and explain what these men's health clinics and online platforms offer to patients and why you think they have become increasingly popular over the years?
Dr. Petar Bajic: Absolutely. So, these clinics have been around for quite a while. Their offerings have evolved over time. But essentially, what these are privately owned, for-profit clinics that do not take insurance and focus on treatment of things like erectile dysfunction, low testosterone. Many of them are focused on restoring youth and things like that.
So, what we see advertised here in town most is a lot of these wave therapies as treatments for erectile dysfunction. We could talk a little bit more about that, as well. That's the in-person type of care. There's also a slew of online digital health platforms which have become increasingly popular over time. Those include things like Hims and Roman, many of which offer convenient online prescriptions, usually at a pretty reasonable cost, but without having to necessarily come into a doctor's office. They take advantage of something called asynchronous telehealth, which essentially means you enter your information into a form along with a photo ID, picture to prove it's you, and then a provider reviews that and basically mails you a prescription.
So, this has been a booming industry in the digital health space. Many of these started as small popups in people's garages, which have now blossomed into multi-billion-dollar businesses that serve patients in all 50 states.
So, it's definitely an interesting area. I think that there are certain things about men, I think, that lure them to these things. Guys aren't crazy, in general, about talking to a doctor about things like cardiovascular disease. It's well-published that they're not necessarily as good about preventative health. Certainly, these issues can be associated with some stigma or perhaps shame for some people, and maybe they don't want to have to have that kind of conversation in person, or maybe not with their primary care doctor who they have established a relationship with. So, there's a little bit more anonymity with some of these services. There's a little bit more perhaps convenience, and men seem to be willing to pay pretty large amounts of money out-of-pocket for these services. I think that's been part of why these businesses have been so successful.
Dr. Scott Steele: Yeah. So, let's dig in a little bit deeper. There's no question, maybe even the private convenience, but you may not even want to sit in a particular waiting room and be looked at and have a little bit of awkwardness or even shame, if you will. And so, I guess my question to start off, is it safe for patients to go ahead, and that form that you're talking about, fill it out and rely on a digital diagnosis and treatment plans for things like erectile dysfunction? And are there risks or drawbacks even associated with some of these medications that are prescribed that can't be picked up through the use of this online platform?
Dr. Petar Bajic: Yeah, I think on the topic of safety, I want to first talk about the digital health platforms. I think that one of the significant limitations to the way that these digital health platforms are working nowadays is that they miss an opportunity to determine what the underlying cause of the ED is. So, you do have to give a little bit of background information, but there's no diagnostics, there's no evaluation to understand why the erectile dysfunction might be happening.
We know that ED, for the vast majority of men, is a consequence of cardiovascular disease. I always refer to it as the "canary in the coal mine." It can be the first sign of a more serious issue, which could... There's solid evidence that shows within five years that a man might experience a heart attack. The reason that this happens is because the hardening and narrowing of the arteries that happens first affects the smallest vessels in the body, and the two arteries that a man relies on for erections are less than a millimeter in diameter. So, they tend to be the first to be affected.
So, if I see a guy with a new complaint of erectile dysfunction and they're not established with a primary care doctor, and they haven't had lipid screening and things like that, that's part of my conversation. We talk about risk factor modification, increasing activity, and reducing or completely stopping things like smoking. A lot of times we end up finding that maybe they did have some underlying high blood pressure, high cholesterol, or maybe even diabetes that they wouldn't have otherwise known about.
So, if somebody's just going online to get a quick prescription, I think there is a significantly missed opportunity there. Those people may not end up finding out they have a problem oftentimes until it's too late. So, I think when you come and see a provider in more of a traditional healthcare setting, we're going to have a little bit more holistic view on that. Certainly, we in urology and in men's health as an area of urology, we're specifically trained to try to identify those things. We also think about things like which of your medications might be contributing? Certain blood pressure pills may be more likely to contribute to erectile dysfunction than others. We can actually work in collaboration with your cardiologist or primary care doctor to figure out a regimen that may control your blood pressure issue, but also not have those sexual side effects.
When we look more at the in-person clinics, many of these advertise a single treatment. For example, radial wave therapy is something that many shops around town here offer, which has been proven in multiple randomized, controlled trials to not be effective for erectile dysfunction. Our guidelines for erectile dysfunction that we follow through the American Urological Association recommend discussion of all the available treatment options, including lifestyle modifications and things like that, and I haven't seen that that type of conversation is happening.
So, people are not being presented with the information they need to make an educated choice about their treatment options in any of these settings. Oftentimes, they're only presented with one option, or a limited number of options, that come at a great cost financially, whereas what they may not realize is that most, if not all, insurance plans will cover at least some treatments for erectile dysfunction.
We see this also in men that have low testosterone. Many of them end up in these direct-to-consumer clinics that charge thousands of dollars. But they don't even know that if they truly have low testosterone, it's a medical condition that's covered by insurance.
So, you really need to go somewhere that's trustworthy, that's going to have your best interest in mind, not only your health but also financial considerations, and really educate yourself on what's out there and more than just a single treatment that is being promised as the cure for all ails.
Dr. Scott Steele: So, let's talk a little bit more about these standalone men's clinics. So, as we talked about, they're very heavily advertised online, commercials, radio, billboards. So, from your research, are these providers, are they urologists? Are they family practice docs? Are they specialists in men health? Are they something else? How would you say does the overall experience in treatment outcomes compare from more traditional things like you get here at the Cleveland Clinic?
Dr. Petar Bajic: Yeah. So, there's been an increasing number of presentations I've seen at conferences and also publications I've seen in the sexual medicine literature that really show that the vast majority of these clinics don't even have a urologist on staff. Many of them are run by people with a variety of backgrounds, everything from internal medicine to OBGYN, to emergency medicine. Some of them don't even have a physician on staff. Maybe not necessarily the ones we have here in town, but some around the country are run by naturopathic providers, sometimes physician's assistants, or others. Some of these treatments that are being offered are being administered by people who really don't have any medical training at all, including medical assistants and things like that.
So, there's really no standardization or regulation of these practices that operate outside of insurance and healthcare the way that we deliver it here at Cleveland Clinic. I think it's increasingly coming into light, some of these factors, and also what's being offered and what the outcomes are.
From what I hear from my patients who come in and have spent thousands of dollars at these clinics is that they were promised that it was going to work. Many of them receive an ultrasound at the initial visit and are shown that their arteries are very small, and then they have the treatment. Then another ultrasound is performed at the end that shows that their arteries are very big, and they must be better. But when they go home and try to actually take advantage of that function, it's not there.
The trick there is that anybody with some creativity and an ultrasound probe can identify blood vessels in the body of varying sizes. If we want to show you something on a screen that tries to sell a certain concept, we can probably find a way to do that. So, I think there is a little bit of misleading happening there.
I mentioned radial wave therapy. So, radial wave therapy is essentially non-focused sound waves, almost like a vibrator type device, that they've been used for a variety of different applications, and really in all the higher quality studies that have been published for the purposes of erectile dysfunction have never been shown to have any significant benefit.
These are devices that require no medical training to operate, which is why most of these clinics use these rather than a more complicated device called shockwave therapy.
Shockwave therapy is a technology that urologists have used for decades to treat kidney stones. What it does is it takes sound waves, but it focuses them on a single point to actually create a shockwave which delivers a higher strength energy to the tissue it's being applied to. In the case of erectile dysfunction, it's been shown in some preliminary studies that it may improve blood flow.
So, there is a relatively solid evidence basis for use of this treatment in the treatment of erectile dysfunction, although it is not yet FDA-approved. Certainly, longer-term studies are needed to confirm that that is a good long-term option.
But unfortunately, the radial wave therapy is being falsely marketed as shockwave therapy, whereas shockwave therapy, pretty much you could only really get through a urologist's office. So, I think patients oftentimes are misled and they don't really understand the difference. Nobody's explaining to them the difference in evidence for one versus the other, the limitations of the evidence for both of them. These are some of what we consider to be what we call regenerative therapies for erectile dysfunction, which is like the new hot thing, exploring and studying and trying to better understand who the right candidates for it are.
So that's, I would say, the most popular thing, and not just in the Cleveland area, but all over the country. A lot of clinics are offering this. There's actually a company out there called GAINSWave that actually does marketing. They work with these small clinics, and they do the marketing for them. They supply the devices. So, you see that name in a lot of these commercials. It doesn't actually refer to a specific device. I have a lot of patients ask about that. That's actually a marketing company.
So, it's a very interesting space. I wish there was an easier way to get the message out to our patients out there, and just men in general, about what's available, what the pluses and minuses of each option are. They really should be informed of the whole menu of various treatment options that are available so they can make an educated decision and understand what are the newer things that maybe don't have as much evidence yet in support of them, what are the things that we've been using since the 1970s and earlier that have been proven by the test of time and have high-quality evidence to support.
Importantly, that really, like most other things we deal with, these are medical issues. They should be covered by your insurance. You shouldn't have to pay 8,000 dollars out-of-pocket. You shouldn't have to take on such a great financial burden when there are options available that are affordable.
Even on the topic of medications, which many patients pay hundreds of dollars for through the digital health platforms, Mark Cuban's new Cost Plus Drugs pharmacy, which is like a mail order pharmacy, I mean you can get 90 pills of the full-strength oral medications for erectile dysfunction for between 8 and 12 dollars, which is 5 percent of what you would pay on one of those digital health platforms. That's with a prescription from your primary care doctor or whoever. So, guys just don't know. I mean they don't know, and we need to continue to spread that awareness.
Dr. Scott Steele: So, what would you say to men who are experiencing urological conditions, but truly they're uncomfortable about having that conversation? So how do we make them feel more at ease about discussing it with the urologist, either face-to-face or virtual?
Dr. Petar Bajic: Yeah. I mean, first and foremost, it's important that we get the message out to men and to their partners who, maybe the men aren't listening, but their partner might be and can share this with them. I mean, these are things that all men deal with at some point in their life. There should be no shame or embarrassment. There are varying degrees of severity, but it's just a normal part of life and it is something that we are used to talking about. Although it may not be something you've talked about before, we talk about it every day.
I understand the concern of running into a friend or neighbor in the waiting room, and you're worried they might ask you what you're there for. By the way, you would not be obligated to tell them at all. But, nowadays, with virtual visits, you could be seen even for a first-time visit from the comfort of your own home. You don't have to come in and see somebody in person.
So, I think there are an increasing number of means by which you can get evaluated by somebody who's experienced in taking a holistic view of your overall health and presenting you with all the different options that are available. It's perfectly fine to start that conversation with a primary care doctor, an internist, or your family doctor. But certainly, if you want a little more specialized information, seeing a urologist is a very reasonable place to start. If you really want to delve into the details of the various options that are available, you can certainly see one of our men's health urology specialists.
There's a lot of great information online, but make sure that it's coming from a reliable source. We've got a couple different webinars that we've done that are available on YouTube and on the Cleveland Clinic website on this topic that you could watch by yourself or with your partner for some background information. There's a lot of great information from any of the national and international professional societies like the Sexual Medicine Society of North America, for example. On the Cleveland Clinic website, there's a lot of great info.
So, educate yourself. If you're getting your information from a place that is trying to sell you some product, particularly if it just seems a little too good to be true, I would really second-guess that and maybe go get another opinion before you commit to spending a lot of money on something that does sound too good to be true. So, yeah, those are my thoughts on that.
Dr. Scott Steele: So, can you talk a little bit more, I know you touched base on this a little bit about the treatment office that we have for erectile dysfunction here at the Cleveland Clinic and how you help to educate the patients and work together in terms of their overall health outcomes. What's the best treatment plan for the individual patient?
Dr. Petar Bajic: Sure. So, first of all, no two patients are the same. When I talk about having a holistic view of the person overall, we need to take everything into consideration, including relationship factors. We take what's going on with the partner into consideration.
Then for the patient themselves, we first want to look for any identifiable reversible causes or modifiable risk factors. So, some of the things that we look at that first visit are there any medications or behaviors that might be contributing to tobacco use, certain medications that can negatively impact directions? We take a look at what's their lifestyle is like. Are they doing any cardiovascular exercise? There is some evidence that for mild erectile dysfunction, increasing the amount of cardio that you do a couple of times a week can be beneficial.
Once we've assessed all those things, we want to think about whether or not there is a hormonal cause. Many men, as they age, their testosterone level can decline. Although that's usually not the primary culprit when it comes to erectile dysfunction, it can contribute, particularly if they have other symptoms that might be suggestive of a low testosterone level. So that's something we can check with a morning blood test.
Then once all of those things have been ruled out, if it just seems like routine blood flow-related ED, which is the most common cause, usually most men want to try a medication first. Like I said, there are very affordable ways of getting those medications as cheap as 10 to 15 dollars for a 90-day supply.
There are some men, however, that either due to some other medical issue cannot take oral medication like that, or they just prefer not to rely on medications, or maybe they've tried them and just were not happy with them because they didn't find them to be effective. That's where the options get a little bit broader.
For those men, in very select cases, that may be somebody who may benefit from something like shockwave therapy, which we do for select individuals. Usually, it's for men who have mild to moderate erectile dysfunction, who have at least a partial response to a pill, and they either don't like the side effects but otherwise would get a good response to it, or perhaps they're close to what they want to get, but not quite. Shockwave therapy might give them a little bit of a boost and get them where they're looking to go. But it's definitely not a permanent fix. It might be what similar treatments like radial wave therapy might be advertised as.
More traditional treatments that are available for men who fail pills include things like a vacuum erection device, which is an external device that could be purchased and used to create an erection using a vacuum, and then basically using a constrictive rubber band to hold the blood in. Those are cumbersome, but some men find them to be beneficial.
There's also penile injection therapy, which is a stronger medication injected directly into the penis. Then there's also an option of something called a penile implant, which is a procedure that takes anywhere from 30 to 60 minutes in general, is outpatient, and very well-tolerated. That's been around since the 1970s. Nowadays there's about 30,000 of those done every year in the United States. So many men have no idea that that's even an option. That, for example, is associated with very high satisfaction rates depending on the study, anywhere from 80 percent to 99 percent satisfaction.
So, there's a lot of great options out there, and it's important to educate yourself about what those options are before you make a decision that's going to be very costly for you, either financially or wasted time and things like that. So, that's pretty much the menu as I would present it to a patient. Certainly, there are some nuances there. Everybody's a little bit different. But that's generally the stuff that we talk about.
Dr. Scott Steele: So now it's time for our quick hitters. Since you're a two-time, we'll give you a slightly different question. So, first of all, salt or sweet?
Dr. Petar Bajic: I'm going to say salt.
Dr. Scott Steele: What is your favorite movie?
Dr. Petar Bajic: Oh. I'm going to say Star Wars: Empire Strikes Back.
Dr. Scott Steele: What was your first car?
Dr. Petar Bajic: First car was a Toyota Camry.
Dr. Scott Steele: Tell us if you have a hidden talent that most people don't know about.
Dr. Petar Bajic: I'm double-jointed.
Dr. Scott Steele: Okay. I did not see that one coming. So fantastic. And so, with that, can you give us a final take-home message to our listeners about this entire project that's going on here?
Dr. Petar Bajic: Sure. So, if you have any kind of concern regarding your sexual health, the keyword there is health. This is a part of the human body and some of the things that can go wrong. It can be related to age or related to some of the health conditions that come with age. Initiate that conversation with your primary care doctor or a urologist, and we'll make sure that we're not missing something serious that could be going on in the background. We want to make sure that you have a long and healthy life and that you can also enjoy not only quantity of life, but quality of life. Certainly, from our perspective, those two things go hand-in-hand, and we need to optimize both. So, on that, I thank you very much again for the opportunity to be here with you guys, and always a pleasure.
Dr. Scott Steele: Yeah. And so, for more information about men's health at the Cleveland Clinic, please visit clevelandclinic.org/menshealth. That's clevelandclinic.org/menshealth. You can also call the Department of Urology at 216-444-5600. That's 216-444-5600. Petar, thanks so much for joining us again on Butts and Guts.
Dr. Petar Bajic: Thanks, Scott.
Dr. Scott Steele: That wraps things up here at Cleveland Clinic. Until next time, thanks for listening to Butts and Guts.Low testosterone can cause sexual dysfunction. It also can leave you feeling not much like yourself. There are many causes for a drop in testosterone levels. Often, diet and lifestyle changes often can help avoid low testosterone and support healthier levels.
Testosterone’s Role in Your Body
Testosterone is the hormone that gives men their male characteristics. Although women make smaller amounts of it in their bodies, testosterone is the major male sex hormone. It affects a man’s appearance, muscle size and strength, sperm production, and sex drive.
It also plays other important roles in the body, including maintaining healthy bone density, fat distribution, and red blood cell production. In men, low testosterone levels may result in reduced body hair, loss of muscle mass, lower sex drive, and impotence. Other effects of low testosterone in men can include brittle bones, hot flashes, enlarged breasts, and even low energy and depression.
Never Miss a Beat!
Subscribe to Our HealthBeat Newsletter!
Thank you for subscribing!
You can now select the specific newsletters you'd like to receive.
You are already subscribed.
Subscribe to more newsletters in our email preference center.
Sorry, an error occurred. Please try again later.
Get Healthy Tips Sent to Your Phone!
What Causes Low Testosterone?
Your testes produce testosterone, but your brain and pituitary gland control the levels in your body. A man’s testosterone level peaks in early adulthood, around the age of 30, and declines naturally with age. Sometimes, however, testosterone levels drop more than they normally should.
Certain health conditions can cause abnormally low testosterone. Some of these include:
- Injury or infection in the testes
- Diabetes
- Kidney disease
- Hormone disorders
- HIV/AIDS
- Alcoholism
Medicines such as opiate painkillers and steroid injections also can cause low testosterone.
If you feel like your testosterone might be abnormally low, you should talk to your doctor. Tests can be done to determine if it’s within a normal range. If necessary, your doctor can order further testing to identify the cause of low testosterone and recommend treatments.
Much of the time, men in their 40s and 50 notice symptoms of lower testosterone — which may be a natural decline due to aging. But if you are overweight, have insulin resistance, are under lots of stress, or aren’t sleeping well, you might have worse symptoms. If your testosterone has dipped because of these factors, the best way to boost it is with diet and lifestyle changes.
Diet and Low Testosterone Levels
Contrary to what you might have heard, there isn’t any single food or supplement that can permanently boost low testosterone levels. Your body makes hormones like testosterone from the nutrients you eat — especially fat, protein, and certain vitamins and minerals. Eating a healthy, balanced diet can go a long way toward supporting healthier testosterone levels as you age.
Researchers have found that men who eat a “Western-style” diet often have lower testosterone levels. A Western-style diet is high in the refined carbs and added sugars found in white bread, desserts, pastries, and sweetened soft drinks. It’s also low in vegetables and often includes more fast foods, fried foods, and unhealthy fats.
A diet that supports healthy testosterone levels includes lots of foods like:
- Lean proteins (skinless poultry, seafood, lean beef)
- Eggs
- Colorful fruits and vegetables (berries, leafy greens, carrots, broccoli)
- Legumes (kidney, black, and navy beans, lentils, chickpeas)
- Nuts, seeds, avocados, and olive oil
- Whole grains (oats, brown rice, whole wheat cereals and breads)
And it includes eliminating — or only occasionally consuming — foods like:
- Alcohol (men should have no more than two drinks per day).
- Chips or fried snacks
- Desserts or pastries
- Fast foods
- Refined grains (white bread, pasta, rice)
- Soft drinks
The Bottom Line
Eating a healthier diet will promote a healthier weight. It can also help your cells become more responsive to insulin if you are showing signs of insulin resistance. Both of these things may help to boost your testosterone and maintain healthy levels as you age.
If you suspect you have symptoms of low testosterone, talk to your doctor. If necessary, your doctor can refer you to a registered dietitian or other specialists who can help with stress management, sleep problems, or sexual dysfunction.
For male sexual and reproductive health issues, contact the UPMC Men’s Health Center at 1-877-641-4636 to connect with an expert.
Sources
Testosterone and Androgens. Hormone Health Network. Endocrine Society.
https://www.hormone.org/your-health-and-hormones/glands-and-hormones-a-to-z/hormones/testosteroneLow Testosterone (Hypogonadism).
Hormone Health Network. Endocrine Society. https://www.hormone.org/diseases-and-conditions/low-testosteroneTestosterone-Associated Dietary Pattern Predicts Low Testosterone Levels and Hypogonadism. Nutrients. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6266690/
Alternatives to Testosterone Therapy: A Review. Sexual Medicine Reviews.
About Men’s Health Center
The UPMC Men’s Health Center evaluates and treats conditions affecting men’s sexual and reproductive health. With years of clinical experience in male sexual medicine and surgery, our team has treated a wide variety of conditions and performed thousands of surgeries. We are dedicated to providing patients the highest level of quality care. Our providers understand the intimate nature of male sexual difficulties, and we will work to help you restore your normal level of sexual function in a comfortable, educational, and discreet environment.Can Low Testosterone Cause Anxiety?
Testosterone is often viewed as a male sex hormone that contributes to sexual function, muscle growth, and energy levels.
However, this hormone is also intricately linked to mental health. Many men with low Testosterone report feeling anxiety, depression, mood swings, and other emotional issues.
Testosterone helps to regulate mood and manage emotion, among other functions. Because of this, low Testosterone can cause anxiety, as well as conditions like depression.
Understanding Testosterone: More Than Just a Male Sex Hormone
Testosterone plays an essential role for both men and women.
In men, Testosterone is produced mainly in the testes. In women, it is produced in the ovaries in much smaller amounts.
Testosterone levels in men tend to peak in their late teens and early twenties, then decline gradually with age.
For women, Testosterone levels vary based on the menstrual cycle and are affected by changing hormone levels during perimenopause and menopause.
Testosterone impacts sexual function, libido, and body composition. It also impacts brain function.
Because of this, a Testosterone deficiency can influence not just physical health but mental health, as well.
What is Anxiety?
Anxiety is a natural stress response to perceived danger or lack of safety. Sometimes anxiety is useful because it can make you more aware of potential hazards in your surroundings.
But when anxiety is chronic, it can hurt your physical and emotional health. Long-term anxiety is typically triggered by events that aren’t life-threatening, even though they often feel like it due to the body’s anxious stress response.
Symptoms of anxiety include:
- Restlessness and running thoughts
- Rapid heart rate and heart palpitations
- Irritability and mood swings
- Difficulty concentrating
- Insomnia and fatigue
- Muscle tension
- Headaches
- Digestive issues
How Low Testosterone May Cause Anxiety
Studies suggest that low Testosterone leads to an increased risk of mood disorders, including both depression and anxiety.
The precise connection between low Testosterone and anxiety remains under study, but researchers have identified potential explanations.
Neurotransmitters and Testosterone
Testosterone seems to play a role in regulating key neurotransmitters like serotonin and dopamine.
Serotonin, or the “feel-good” neurotransmitter, has a major impact on mood and anxiety levels.
Low Testosterone can disrupt the production of serotonin, which may lead to increased anxiety. Low T can also impact how well serotonin functions in the body.
Dopamine influences motivation and pleasure. This neurotransmitter can also be negatively affected by lower Testosterone levels, which may contribute to feelings of anxiety and low mood.
Cortisol Levels
Cortisol is the body’s primary stress hormone. High cortisol levels are associated with anxiety, stress, and panic attacks.
Testosterone and cortisol have an inverse relationship. When Testosterone levels are low, cortisol levels often rise. High cortisol levels can also suppress Testosterone production, leading to a cycle of low T and elevated cortisol.
Because of this relationship, Testosterone’s impact on cortisol levels could lead to increased anxiety for men with low Testosterone.
Insomnia and Poor Sleep
Low Testosterone is associated with sleep issues like insomnia. Men with low T typically have a harder time falling asleep and staying asleep.
Poor sleep quality can make anxiety symptoms worse. This often leads to a cycle where anxiety disrupts sleep, and lack of sleep worsens anxiety.
Social and Psychological Factors
Testosterone is often linked to perceptions of masculinity and strength. It contributes to things like muscle growth, sex drive, and sexual function.
Low Testosterone can impact these markers of masculinity, which may cause men to lose self-confidence and self-esteem. These feelings of inadequacy can lead to anxiety and depression.
Can Testosterone Replacement Therapy Help with Anxiety?
For men who experience anxiety and low Testosterone, Testosterone Replacement Therapy (TRT) is an important treatment to consider.
TRT is designed to restore Testosterone levels to a healthy range. Many men who undergo TRT report improvements in mood, energy levels, and overall mental health.
Defy Medical offers expertly guided TRT plans. Men who qualify for the treatment can attend their appointments via telemedicine and order medications easily online through Defy Medical’s patient portal.
Ready to learn more?
Get StartedCan Low Testosterone Cause ED?
Low Testosterone and ED
Low testosterone levels are one of the most common causes of erectile dysfunction (ED). If you’re experiencing ED and it’s impacting your sex life, it’s a good idea to check your Testosterone levels for a potential deficiency.
Read on to learn more about why low T can cause ED, and how you can take steps to eliminate your erectile dysfunction.
Testosterone Uses in the Body
Because sex drive and sexual function are closely tied with Testosterone production, low Testosterone levels can lead to ED and decreased libido.
Testosterone is a very important male hormone, or androgen. It’s responsible for several key functions. These include:
- Maintaining sex drive and sexual function
- Regulating body composition
- Aiding in muscle growth
- Developing secondary sex characteristics
When you have low Testosterone, some or all of these functions may be impacted. In addition to ED and loss of sex drive, low T can also lead to weight gain, difficulty building muscle, fatigue, mood disorders like anxiety and depression, and more.
How Can You Treat ED caused by Low Testosterone?
The most comprehensive treatment for ED caused by low Testosterone is Testosterone Replacement Therapy (TRT). TRT is an ongoing therapy that addresses the root cause of the problem, rather than just treating the symptoms. Replenishing Testosterone levels often stops hormone-related ED completely.
Testosterone can be delivered via injections, topical creams and gels, implantable pellets, and more to help optimize your levels.
ED can also be treated by oral medications like Sildenafil (Viagra), Tadalafil (Cialis), and Vardenafil (Levitra), as well as penile injections like Trimix. These medications do not address the cause of your ED, but they can help you achieve healthy erections.
There are in-clinic procedures that can help treat ED, as well. Shockwave Therapy is a noninvasive procedure that uses acoustic waves to repair damaged blood vessels. PRP injections inject restorative platelet rich plasma into the penis to encourage blood vessel repair and growth.
If you want to pursue TRT or other ED therapies, it’s important to work with Men’s Health experts who understand how to create an individualized plan that suits your needs.
When it comes to TRT, hormones are a delicate balance and require careful testing and monitoring so your levels stay elevated over time.
Defy Medical has been offering TRT and ED therapies to men for nearly a decade via telemedicine. We are up to date on the latest advancements in hormone restoration and have the practical experience to help you reach levels that make you feel your best. Contact us to learn more.
What Causes Low Testosterone?
Low Testosterone can have many causes. It’s not always clear what triggers a decrease in Testosterone production.
One of the biggest causes of low Testosterone is aging. As men get older, their natural hormone production may decrease. In fact, low Testosterone affects approximately 40% of men over the age of 45.
Many symptoms that we consider part of aging are actually due to shifting hormone levels. You may experience changes in body composition, difficulty achieving gains at the gym, slower recovery times, less energy, and more.
But age isn’t the only cause of low T.
Other potential causes include:
- Obesity and diabetes
- Certain medications and medical conditions
- Illicit drug use
- Injury or infection of the testes
- Environmental factors like exposure to chemicals
Regardless of age, if you’re experiencing symptoms of low Testosterone like erectile dysfunction, it’s possible you have a deficiency.
We recommend anyone with low T symptoms to get comprehensive blood testing for a better understanding of their hormone health.
How Do You Test for Low Testosterone?
Comprehensive testing is the key to understanding your hormone levels and overall health.
At Defy Medical, we recommend the following test for a complete picture of your hormone and overall health:
- Free and Total Testosterone
- Sex Hormone Binding Globulin
- Estradiol (Estrogen)
- DHEA-S
- Thyroid Stimulating Hormone (TSH)
- Prostate Specific Antigen (PSA)
- Luteinizing Hormone
- Insulin-Like Growth Factor (IGF-1)
- Comprehensive Metabolic Panel (CMP)
- Complete Blood Count Panel (CBC)
- Lipid Panel
Tests like Free and Total Testosterone, Estradiol, and Sex Hormone Binding Globulin show your hormone levels and how well they’re utlized by the body. Tests like Thyroid Stimulating Hormone help identify other potential causes of your symptoms, including thyroid disease. Finally, tests like the Metabolic and CBC panels illuminate your overall health, so our providers can treat you appropriately.
TRT to Treat ED with Defy Medical
Erectile dysfunction affects as many as one-third of men. It often causes embarrassment, a lack of satisfaction, and an overall decrease in quality of life.
But there are treatments that can address your ED – potentially for good.
Ready to learn more?
Get StartedThyroid disease in men can cause low sperm count, loss of muscle mass, and erectile dysfunction. Thyroid disease is much more common in women, so men may not attribute symptoms unique to men as secondary to thyroid disease. However, men tend to have increased thyroid problems with age.
The endocrine system is complex. A slight change in one hormone can have far-reaching consequences throughout the body. Testosterone levels decline at a rate of about one percent per year, beginning around the age of 30.
Because of the interrelationship between hormone functions, you may notice symptoms that seem unrelated. It can be difficult to diagnose low testosterone levels. Once your testosterone levels are low enough to cause symptoms, such as
- Low libido
- Low energy
- Few spontaneous erections
- Decreased muscle mass
The diagnosis may be clear.
However, most men want to take whatever steps possible to prevent these symptoms from developing. You can support your body’s ability to make testosterone by getting enough sleep, eating nutrient-dense foods with healthy sources of protein and fats, and engaging in physical activity that improves strength, balance, and cardiovascular fitness.
If these lifestyle changes are not enough to reverse or at least improve your symptoms, consider having your testosterone levels tested.
The Relationship Between Thyroid Hormone And Testosterone Hormone
It is also important to determine whether an abnormal thyroid hormone level is causing your symptoms. Sexual dysfunction affects 59-63 percent of men with hypothyroidism and 48-77 percent of men with hyperthyroidism (Gabrielson et al., 2019).
The thyroid gland is a butterfly-shaped gland on the front of the neck. It releases two hormones, triiodothyronine (T3) and thyroxine (T4). These hormones regulate:
- Metabolism
- The nervous system
- The immune system
- Muscle strength
- Body weight
- Temperature levels
- Sleep cycles
- Cognition
- Heart and bone health
- Cholesterol levels
- Digestion
- Reproduction
Thyroid function also affects growth hormone production, cortisol (stress hormone) levels, glucocorticoid levels, and gonadal function (Merkle, 2004). It is very difficult to isolate the functions of one hormone from the rest.
The thyroid gland is regulated by a negative feedback loop. When T4 levels are too low, the hypothalamus produces thyrotropin-releasing hormones (TRH), and the pituitary gland produces thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) to prod the thyroid to increase production. Conversely, if T4 is too high, TRH and TSH production is inhibited.
A properly functioning thyroid gland produces just the right amount of thyroid hormone to meet the body’s needs. If too much thyroid hormone is produced, it is called hyperthyroidism. If too little is produced, it is called hypothyroidism.
Hypothyroidism
Hypothyroidism is a condition in which the thyroid gland does not produce enough thyroid hormone. Thyroid hormone production can be adequate for normal body function, inadequate or subclinical, which means that TSH levels are slightly above the upper range of normal but not enough to warrant a diagnosis of hypothyroidism.
Symptoms Of Hypothyroidism (Too Low Thyroid):
- Weight gain
- Dry skin
- Fatigue
- Feeling cold
- Constipation
- Depression
- Muscle aches and stiffness
- Hair loss
- Enlarged thyroid
- Low sex drive
- Delayed ejaculation
- Erectile dysfunction
- Increased cholesterol
- Loss of eyebrow hair
- Memory impairment
Potential Causes Of Hypothyroidism:
- Iodine deficiency (iodine is required to produce thyroid hormone)
- Hashimoto’s thyroiditis (autoimmune thyroid disease)
Research To Support A Link Between Hypothyroidism And Testosterone Levels
The hypothalamus secretes gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH). GnRH stimulates the anterior pituitary gland to produce luteinizing hormone (LH) and follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH). LH stimulates testosterone production in the testes.
Testosterone is transported through the bloodstream, primarily bound to the protein sex hormone-binding globulin (SHBG), though some can be carried by another protein called albumin. A small amount of testosterone, free testosterone, is not bound to a protein.
Increased TSH levels due to hypothyroidism cause a decreased LH response to GnRH. Recall that LH stimulates the testes to produce testosterone. This abnormal response is associated with low testosterone levels. Men with hypothyroidism have low free testosterone levels. However, when thyroid hormone levels are normalized, testosterone levels return to normal as well (Meikle, 2004; Kumar et al., 1990).
Hypothyroidism can also cause an increase in prolactin levels, a hormone that stimulates milk production in nursing mothers. Increased prolactin levels can also lower testosterone levels (Chen et al., 2018).
Subclinical hypothyroidism has been linked to lower testosterone levels and higher prolactin levels. However, more research is needed to determine the significance of this finding (Kumar et al., 2006).
Hyperthyroidism
Hyperthyroidism is a condition in which the thyroid gland produces too much thyroid hormone. Grave’s disease, an autoimmune disorder, is often the cause of hyperthyroidism. The connection between hyperthyroidism and testosterone is less clear, but there is evidence that changes in thyroid hormone levels can affect how testosterone is delivered in the bloodstream.
Symptoms Of Hyperthyroidism (Too High Thyroid):
- Weight loss
- Racing heartbeat
- Feeling warm
- Tremors
- Feeling anxious, nervous, or irritable
- Increased appetite
- Difficulty sleeping
- Fatigue
- Enlarged thyroid
- Low sex drive
- Premature ejaculation
- Diarrhea
Potential Causes Of Hyperthyroidism:
- Grave’s disease (an autoimmune disorder)
- Thyroid nodules
- Inflammation of the thyroid
- Too much iodine in the diet (Melish et al., 199)
Research That Supports A Link Between Hyperthyroidism And Testosterone Levels
Men with hyperthyroidism have higher testosterone levels, higher sex hormone-binding globulin (SHBG) levels, and an increased LH response to GnRH (Meikle, 2004).
High SHBG levels are associated with a drop in free testosterone levels. Men with hyperthyroidism may have changes in how the hypothalamus, pituitary, and testes interact, which may also cause symptoms (Hudson & Edwards, 1992).
Treatment Options
The first step is to have a thorough history and physical exam. After that, your healthcare provider may advise you to have your TSH and T4 levels taken to screen for thyroid disease. If your thyroid function is abnormal, the next step is to determine the cause and discuss treatment options.
Once your thyroid hormone levels have been corrected, your doctor may test your testosterone levels.
The American Urological Society defines low testosterone (Low-T) as less than 300 nanograms per deciliter (ng/dl). Low testosterone levels can cause a low sex drive, decreased lean muscle, irritability, fatigue, erectile dysfunction, and depression.
- Total testosterone level: Generally, two separate testosterone levels are obtained, with both levels taken before noon, as testosterone levels tend to naturally decrease later in the day.
- Luteinizing hormone (LH): LH stimulates the production of testosterone in the testes. Abnormal levels may indicate a problem with the pituitary gland.
- Blood prolactin level: Prolactin is a hormone that stimulates breast development and milk production in the female. Increased levels in the male may be a sign of a benign pituitary tumor, among other possible causes.
Total testosterone levels measure testosterone that is mostly bound to SHBG and albumin, whereas free testosterone measures unbound testosterone.
Side effects can occur when testosterone is used incorrectly or at an excessively high level. Therefore, it is important to work with your healthcare provider to ensure that you can maximize the benefits of testosterone replacement therapy while minimizing the risks.-
Consumer Health: What does ‘male menopause’ mean?
Hormone changes are a natural part of aging, but the experience is different for men and women. Unlike the more dramatic plunge that occurs in women during menopause, sex hormone changes in men occur gradually. This is sometimes called male menopause.
For women, menopause marks the end of their menstrual cycles, whether by naturally declining reproductive hormones, surgical removal of the ovaries, changes caused by chemotherapy or radiation therapy, or a conditional called primary ovarian insufficiency. Ovulation ends and hormone production plummets during a relatively short period of time.
In men, production of testosterone and other hormones declines over a period of many years and the consequences aren't necessarily clear. This gradual decline of testosterone levels is called late-onset hypogonadism or age-related low testosterone.
Recognizing low testosterone levels
A man's testosterone levels decline on average about 1% a year after 40. But most older men still have testosterone levels within the normal range, with only an estimated 10% to 25% having levels considered to be low.
Low testosterone levels in older men often goes unnoticed. Testosterone levels can be checked by a blood test, but tests aren't done routinely. And many men who have low testosterone levels experience no symptoms. In addition, the signs and symptoms associated with low testosterone aren't specific to low testosterone. They also can be caused by a person's age, medication use, or other conditions, such as having a body mass index of 30 or higher.
Signs and symptoms suggestive of low testosterone include:
- Reduced sexual desire and activity.
- Decreased spontaneous erections or erectile dysfunction.
- Breast discomfort or swelling.
- Infertility.
- Height loss, low trauma fracture or low bone mineral density.
- Hot flushes or sweats.
Other possible symptoms include decreased energy, motivation and confidence; depressed mood; and poor concentration. It's also possible to experience increased sleepiness; sleep disturbances; mild, unexplained anemia; reduced muscle bulk and strength; and increased body fat.
Experts recommend only testing older men for low testosterone if they have signs or symptoms. If an initial test shows low testosterone, the test should be repeated to confirm the results. If low testosterone is confirmed, further testing of the pituitary gland is recommended to determine the cause and rule out other hormone deficiencies. The pituitary gland is a kidney-bean-sized gland situated at the base of your brain. It is part of your body's endocrine system, which consists of all the glands that produce and regulate hormones.
Treatment
Recommendations on testosterone therapy for men with age-related low testosterone vary. In 2020, the American College of Physicians recommended that healthcare professionals consider starting testosterone treatment in men with sexual dysfunction who want to improve their sexual function, after explaining the risks and benefits. In 2018, the Endocrine Society recommended testosterone therapy for men with age-related low testosterone who have signs and symptoms associated with low testosterone.
Some experts also recommend offering testosterone treatment to men with age-related low testosterone without the presence of signs or symptoms.
If you choose to start testosterone therapy, your healthcare professional will explain the different ways testosterone can be administered, target levels and follow-up testing.
For some men, testosterone therapy relieves bothersome signs and symptoms of testosterone deficiency. For others, the benefits aren't clear, and there are possible risks.
Though further research is needed, testosterone therapy might stimulate growth of metastatic prostate and breast cancer. Testosterone therapy also may increase the risk of heart attack and stroke and contribute to the formation of blood clots in the veins.
Your healthcare team likely will recommend against starting testosterone therapy if your fertility is important in the near future or if you have conditions such as breast or prostate cancer, untreated severe obstructive sleep apnea, uncontrolled heart failure, or thrombophilia, or if you've recently had a heart attack or stroke.
If you think you might have low testosterone, talk to your healthcare team about your signs and symptoms, testing, and possible treatment options. They can help you weigh the pros and cons of treatment.
Connect with other men talking about healthy aging in the Men's Health Support Group on Mayo Clinic Connect, an online patient community moderated by Mayo Clinic.Free Testosterone
Does this test have other names?
Free T-index
What is this test?
This test measures the amount of unattached, or "free," testosterone in your blood.
Testosterone is a male sex hormone (androgen) that helps male features develop. Most testosterone is made in the testes (in men) and the ovaries (in women). A small amount is made in the adrenal glands.
Testosterone causes the changes that occur in boys during puberty. It helps hair, bone, and muscles grow. It also helps the penis and testes grow. Testosterone also causes a boy's voice to deepen. Men continue to make testosterone. It boosts sex drive and helps make sperm.
Women's ovaries also make small amounts of testosterone. It helps many organs and body processes in women.
The pituitary gland in your brain controls the amount of testosterone your body makes.
Most of the testosterone in your blood attaches to two proteins: albumin and sex hormone binding globulin. Some testosterone is free, which means that it isn't attached to proteins. Free testosterone and albumin-bound testosterone are also referred to as bioavailable testosterone. This is the testosterone that is easily used by your body.
If your doctor thinks that you have low or high testosterone, your total testosterone levels will be checked first. This looks at all three types of testosterone. The free testosterone can help give more information when total testosterone is low.
Both men and women can have health problems because of low or high levels of testosterone. Women with high levels of testosterone may have polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS). This condition can cause:
-
Infertility.
-
Lack of menstruation.
-
Acne.
-
Obesity.
-
Blood sugar problems.
-
Extra hair growth, especially on the face.
Men with low levels of testosterone (hypogonadism) may have:
-
Loss of sex drive.
-
Low energy.
-
Bone loss.
-
Infertility.
Testosterone levels in men drop as they age. But this is not considered to be hypogonadism. The FDA currently advises against treating men with low testosterone caused only by aging.
Why do I need this test?
You may need this test to find out whether a low sex drive is caused by a low level of testosterone. In recent years, doctors have used testosterone therapy to treat both men and women with low sex drives.
The test is also done for men with andropause, or late-onset hypogonadism. This is a condition caused by decreased testosterone. Men with this condition may have:
-
Anemia.
-
Depression.
-
Decreased bone density.
-
Lack of energy, or fatigue.
-
Loss of muscle mass.
-
Poor concentration.
-
Erectile dysfunction or inability to have an orgasm.
-
Infertility.
Men with HIV/AIDS may also have low testosterone levels.
Symptoms of high testosterone in women include:
-
Irregular or no menstruation.
-
Extra hair growth, especially on the face.
-
Blood sugar imbalance.
-
Infertility.
-
Thinning hair on the scalp.
If you are a man and this test shows that your free testosterone is lower than normal, your doctor may prescribe testosterone therapy. The FDA has not approved any testosterone medicines for women.
What other tests might I have along with this test?
Men may have other tests, including:
-
Blood tests for other hormones. These include tests to check levels of luteinizing hormone, follicle-stimulating hormone, thyroid-stimulating hormone, and prolactin. These are all hormones made by the pituitary gland.
-
Sperm analysis. This test counts the number of live sperm in the liquid that a man ejaculates. This test is often used to look for an infertility problem.
-
Testicular biopsy. This is a tissue sample from the testes.
-
MRI of the pituitary gland. This is an imaging test to look for growths on the gland.
Women may have other blood tests to check:
-
Androstenedione, total testosterone, and dehydroepiandrosterone sulfate. These are other types of androgen hormones.
-
LH, FSH, TSH, and prolactin. These are all hormones made by the pituitary gland.
-
Partial 21-hydroxylase deficiency. This condition affects the adrenal glands. High-risk groups for this condition include Ashkenazi Jews.
What do my test results mean?
Test results may vary depending on your age, gender, health history, and other things. Your test results may be different depending on the lab used. They may not mean you have a problem. Ask your doctor what your test results mean for you.
How is this test done?
The test is done with a blood sample. A needle is used to take blood from a vein in your arm or hand. This test is usually done in the morning because testosterone levels tend to be highest at that time. You may need to have this test more than once, and at different times of the day, to confirm low testosterone levels. This is because your testosterone level can change from morning to evening and from day to day.
Does this test pose any risks?
Having a blood test with a needle carries some risks. These include bleeding, infection, bruising, and feeling lightheaded. When the needle pokes your arm or hand, you may feel a slight sting or pain. Afterward, the site may be sore.
What might affect my test results?
Drinking a lot of alcohol can affect men's hormone levels. Obesity and diabetes can also affect men's testosterone levels.
For women, some health conditions, such as PCOS, can increase free testosterone.
How do I get ready for this test?
You don't need to prepare for this test. But make sure that your doctor knows about all medicines, herbs, vitamins, and supplements you are taking. This includes medicines that don't need a prescription and any illegal drugs you may use.
Medical Reviewers:
- Lalitha Kadali
- Raymond Turley Jr PA-CDo you feel like you’re always weak and tired? Is your sex drive gone, or are you suffering from erectile dysfunction? These are symptoms that are difficult for many men to admit to experiencing but answering “yes” to these questions could be a sign that you have low testosterone.
If you do, it may be comforting to know that you’re not alone. While few men talk about it, low testosterone affects more than 5 million men between the ages of 30 and 80 across the globe. These men experience unwanted symptoms like lower libido, weakening muscles, and even depression. But how do you know if you officially have low testosterone?
According to urologist and reproductive medicine/sexual health expert Ali Dabaja, M.D., the best way to find out is to educate yourself on this condition.
Identifying The Symptoms Of Low Testosterone
Low testosterone is associated with multiple signs and symptoms, including:
- Body hair loss (including on your face)
- Breast enlargement (gynecomastia)
- Decreased bone density and muscle mass
- Lower libido
- Decreased sperm counts
- Depression
- Hot flashes
- Increased body fat
- Reduced mental concentration
- Soft and small testicles
- Tiredness
When To Talk To Your Doctor About Testosterone Levels
The only way to officially receive a low testosterone diagnosis is to visit your doctor. They will provide specific screening for the problem and help you decide on the best next steps. Make sure your doctor provides an emphasis on safety when screening and recommending treatment.
Your symptoms will be evaluated and your doctor will conduct blood tests to examine your levels of:
- Free testosterone (not bound to any proteins) and total testosterone
- Other hormones, including the follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH), luteinizing hormone (LH) and estradiol.
Your doctor will want to rule out any underlying health condition that may contribute to lower testosterone levels (such as obesity or type 2 diabetes).
Another approach may be to implement a healthier lifestyle with regular exercise and a well-rounded diet. One study published in The Journal of Sexual Medicine found that men who participated in moderate-intensity exercise for more than three-and-a-half hours per week had improvement in their testosterone levels.
The bottom line is this: If you are experiencing symptoms of low testosterone, see your doctor. He or she will be able to fully determine the cause of your symptoms and recommend the right treatment approach.
To find a doctor or make an appointment, visit henryford.com or call 1-800-436-7936.
Dr. Ali Dabaja is a urologist specializing in a reproductive medicine and sexual health with the Henry Ford Vattikuti Urology Institute.Testosterone is a hormone made by the testicles. It is important for a man's sex drive, bodily development, and physical appearance.
Certain health conditions, medicines, or injury can lead to low testosterone (low-T). Testosterone levels also naturally drop with age. Low testosterone can affect sex drive, mood, and changes in muscle and fat.
Treatment with testosterone therapy may help reduce symptoms.
How Testosterone Affects Health
Testosterone makes a man look and feel like a man. In a man, this hormone helps:
- Keep bones and muscles strong
- Determine hair growth and where fat is on the body
- Make sperm
- Maintain sex drive and erections
- Make red blood cells
- Boost energy and mood
Causes of Low Testosterone
Beginning around age 30 to 40, testosterone levels may start to slowly decrease. This occurs naturally.
Other causes of low testosterone include:
- Medicine side effects, such as from chemotherapy.
- Testicle injury or cancer.
- Problems with glands in the brain (hypothalamus and pituitary) that control hormone production.
- Low thyroid function.
- Too much body fat (obesity). Ask your health care provider whether you need a test called free testosterone.
- Other disorders, chronic diseases, treatments, or infection.
Symptoms
Some men with low testosterone do not have any symptoms. Others may have:
- Low sex drive
- Problems having an erection
- Low sperm count
- Sleep problems such as insomnia
- Decrease in muscle size and strength
- Bone loss
- Increase in body fat
- Depression
- Trouble concentrating
Some symptoms may be a normal part of aging. For example, it is normal to feel less interested in sex as you get older. But, it is not usually normal to have no interest in sex.
Symptoms may also be caused by other conditions, such as high blood pressure or diabetes. If any of these symptoms are bothering you, talk with your provider.
Treatment Options
Your provider will likely have you get a blood test to check your testosterone level. You will also be checked for other causes of your symptoms. These include medicine side effects, thyroid problems, or depression.
If you have low testosterone, hormone therapy may help. The medicine used is man-made testosterone. This treatment is called testosterone replacement therapy, or TRT. TRT can be given as a pill, gel, patch, injection, or implant.
TRT may relieve or improve symptoms in some men. It may help keep bones and muscles strong. TRT seems to be more effective in young men with very low testosterone levels. TRT can also be helpful for older men.
TRT has risks. These may include:
- Infertility
- Enlarged prostate leading to difficulty urinating
- Blood clots
- Worsening cardiovascular disease
- Sleep problems
- Cholesterol problems
At this time, it is unclear whether TRT increases the risk of prostate cancer or symptoms of benign prostatic hyperplasia. However, TRT is avoided in men with prostate or breast cancer as it may worsen their condition. There is an increased risk of high blood pressure with TRT.
Talk with your provider about whether TRT is right for you. If you do not notice any change in symptoms after treatment for 3 months, it is less likely that TRT treatment will benefit you.
If you decide to start TRT, be sure to see your provider for regular checkups.
When to Call the Doctor
Contact your provider if:
- You have symptoms of low testosterone
- You have questions or concerns about treatment
Alternative Names
Male menopause; Andropause; Testosterone deficiency; Low-T; Androgen deficiency of the aging male; Late-onset hypogonadism
References
Matsumoto AM, Anawalt BD. Testicular disorders. In: Melmed S, Auchus RJ, Goldfine AB, Rosen CJ, Kopp PA, eds. Williams Textbook of Endocrinology. 15th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2025:chap 17.
Swerdloff RS, Wang C. The testis and male hypogonadism, infertility, and sexual dysfunction. In: Goldman L, Cooney KA, eds. Goldman-Cecil Medicine. 27th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2024:chap 216.
US Food and Drug Administration website. FDA drug safety communication: FDA cautions about using testosterone products for low testosterone due to aging; requires labeling change to inform of possible increased risk of heart attack and stroke with use. www.fda.gov/drugs/drug-safety-and-availability/fda-drug-safety-communication-fda-cautions-about-using-testosterone-products-low-testosterone-due. Updated February 28, 2025. Accessed May 7, 2025.
Review Date 4/24/2025
Updated by: Sandeep K. Dhaliwal, MD, board-certified in Diabetes, Endocrinology, and Metabolism, Springfield, VA. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.Could You Have Low Testosterone?
Definition
Testosterone is a hormone made by the testicles. It is important for a man's sex drive and physical appearance.
Certain health conditions, medicines, or injury can lead to low testosterone (low-T). Testosterone level also naturally drops with age. Low testosterone can affect sex drive, mood, and changes in muscle and fat.
Treatment with testosterone therapy may help reduce symptoms.
Alternative Names
Male menopause; Andropause; Testosterone deficiency; Low-T; Androgen deficiency of the aging male; Late-onset hypogonadism
How Testosterone Affects Health
Testosterone makes a man look and feel like a man. In a man, this hormone helps:
- Keep bones and muscles strong
- Determine hair growth and where fat is on the body
- Make sperm
- Maintain sex drive and erections
- Make red blood cells
- Boost energy and mood
Causes of Low Testosterone
Beginning around age 30 to 40, testosterone levels may start to slowly decrease. This occurs naturally.
Other causes of low testosterone include:
- Medicine side effects, such as from chemotherapy.
- Testicle injury or cancer.
- Problems with glands in the brain (hypothalamus and pituitary) that control hormone production.
- Low thyroid function.
- Too much body fat (obesity). Ask your doctor whether you need a test called free testosterone.
- Other disorders, chronic diseases, treatments, or infection.
Symptoms
Some men with low testosterone do not have any symptoms. Others may have:
- Low sex drive
- Problems having an erection
- Low sperm count
- Sleep problems such as insomnia
- Decrease in muscle size and strength
- Bone loss
- Increase in body fat
- Depression
- Trouble concentrating
Some symptoms may be a normal part of aging. For example, it is normal to feel less interested in sex as you get older. But, it is not usually normal to have no interest in sex.
Symptoms may also be caused by other conditions, such as high blood pressure or diabetes. If any of these symptoms are bothering you, talk with your health care provider.
Treatment Options
Your provider will likely have you get a blood test to check your testosterone level. You will also be checked for other causes of your symptoms. These include medicine side effects, thyroid problems, or depression.
If you have low testosterone, hormone therapy may help. The medicine used is man-made testosterone. This treatment is called testosterone replacement therapy, or TRT. TRT can be given as a pill, gel, patch, injection, or implant.
TRT may relieve or improve symptoms in some men. It may help keep bones and muscles strong. TRT seems to be more effective in young men with very low testosterone levels. TRT can also be helpful for older men.
TRT has risks. These may include:
- Infertility
- Enlarged prostate leading to difficulty urinating
- Blood clots
- Worsening heart failure
- Sleep problems
- Cholesterol problems
At this time, it is unclear whether TRT increases the risk of heart attack, stroke, or prostate cancer.
Talk with your provider about whether TRT is right for you. If you do not notice any change in symptoms after treatment for 3 months, it is less likely that TRT treatment will benefit you.
If you decide to start TRT, be sure to see your provider for regular checkups.
When to Call the Doctor
Call your provider if:
- You have symptoms of low testosterone
- You have questions or concerns about treatment
References
Allan CA, McLachlin RI. Androgen deficiency disorders. In: Jameson JL, De Groot LJ, de Kretser DM, et al, eds. Endocrinology: Adult and Pediatric. 7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 139.
Morgentaler A, Zitzmann M, Traish AM, et al. Fundamental concepts regarding testosterone deficiency and treatment: international expert consensus resolutions. Mayo Clin Proc. 2016;91(7):881-896. PMID: 27313122 pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/27313122/.
U.S. Food and Drug Administration website. FDA drug safety communication: FDA cautions about using testosterone products for low testosterone due to aging; requires labeling change to inform of possible increased risk of heart attack and stroke with use. www.fda.gov/drugs/drugsafety/ucm436259.htm. Updated February 26, 2018. Accessed July 6, 2021.Could you have low testosterone?
Male menopause; Andropause; Testosterone deficiency; Low-T; Androgen deficiency of the aging male; Late-onset hypogonadism
Testosterone is a hormone made by the testicles. It is important for a man's sex drive, bodily development, and physical appearance.
Certain health conditions, medicines, or injury can lead to low testosterone (low-T). Testosterone levels also naturally drop with age. Low testosterone can affect sex drive, mood, and changes in muscle and fat.
Treatment with testosterone therapy may help reduce symptoms.
How Testosterone Affects Health
Testosterone makes a man look and feel like a man. In a man, this hormone helps:
- Keep bones and muscles strong
- Determine hair growth and where fat is on the body
- Make sperm
- Maintain sex drive and erections
- Make red blood cells
- Boost energy and mood
Causes of Low Testosterone
Beginning around age 30 to 40, testosterone levels may start to slowly decrease. This occurs naturally.
Other causes of low testosterone include:
- Medicine side effects, such as from chemotherapy.
- Testicle injury or cancer.
- Problems with glands in the brain (hypothalamus and pituitary) that control hormone production.
- Low thyroid function.
- Too much body fat (obesity). Ask your health care provider whether you need a test called free testosterone.
- Other disorders, chronic diseases, treatments, or infection.
Symptoms
Some men with low testosterone do not have any symptoms. Others may have:
- Low sex drive
- Problems having an erection
- Low sperm count
- Sleep problems such as insomnia
- Decrease in muscle size and strength
- Bone loss
- Increase in body fat
- Depression
- Trouble concentrating
Some symptoms may be a normal part of aging. For example, it is normal to feel less interested in sex as you get older. But, it is not usually normal to have no interest in sex.
Symptoms may also be caused by other conditions, such as high blood pressure or diabetes. If any of these symptoms are bothering you, talk with your provider.
Treatment Options
Your provider will likely have you get a blood test to check your testosterone level. You will also be checked for other causes of your symptoms. These include medicine side effects, thyroid problems, or depression.
If you have low testosterone, hormone therapy may help. The medicine used is man-made testosterone. This treatment is called testosterone replacement therapy, or TRT. TRT can be given as a pill, gel, patch, injection, or implant.
TRT may relieve or improve symptoms in some men. It may help keep bones and muscles strong. TRT seems to be more effective in young men with very low testosterone levels. TRT can also be helpful for older men.
TRT has risks. These may include:
- Infertility
- Enlarged prostate leading to difficulty urinating
- Blood clots
- Worsening cardiovascular disease
- Sleep problems
- Cholesterol problems
At this time, it is unclear whether TRT increases the risk of prostate cancer or symptoms of benign prostatic hyperplasia. However, TRT is avoided in men with prostate or breast cancer as it may worsen their condition. There is an increased risk of high blood pressure with TRT.
Talk with your provider about whether TRT is right for you. If you do not notice any change in symptoms after treatment for 3 months, it is less likely that TRT treatment will benefit you.
If you decide to start TRT, be sure to see your provider for regular checkups.
When to Call the Doctor
Contact your provider if:
- You have symptoms of low testosterone
- You have questions or concerns about treatment
References
Matsumoto AM, Anawalt BD. Testicular disorders. In: Melmed S, Auchus RJ, Goldfine AB, Rosen CJ, Kopp PA, eds. Williams Textbook of Endocrinology. 15th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2025:chap 17.
Swerdloff RS, Wang C. The testis and male hypogonadism, infertility, and sexual dysfunction. In: Goldman L, Cooney KA, eds. Goldman-Cecil Medicine. 27th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2024:chap 216.
US Food and Drug Administration website. FDA drug safety communication: FDA cautions about using testosterone products for low testosterone due to aging; requires labeling change to inform of possible increased risk of heart attack and stroke with use.
Version Info
Last reviewed on: 4/24/2025
Reviewed by: Sandeep K. Dhaliwal, MD, board-certified in Diabetes, Endocrinology, and Metabolism, Springfield, VA. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.Feeling tired, irritable, and not as interested in sex as you used to be? You may be suffering from low testosterone.
Testosterone is the male hormone made in the testicles. Low testosterone occurs more often in older men, but younger men can have the condition.
The only way to find out if you have normal testosterone is to get a blood test.
What Does Testosterone Do?
Testosterone jump-starts puberty. Testosterone triggers male features like facial hair, a deepening voice, and muscle strength. Men need testosterone to make sperm.
Never Miss a Beat!
Subscribe to Our HealthBeat Newsletter!
Thank you for subscribing!
You can now select the specific newsletters you'd like to receive.
You are already subscribed.
Subscribe to more newsletters in our email preference center.
Sorry, an error occurred. Please try again later.
Get Healthy Tips Sent to Your Phone!
What Is Normal Testosterone by Age?
The amount of testosterone in the bloodstream increases during adolescence and peaks in a man’s twenties.
By age 30 or 35, testosterone levels decrease by about 1% each year. This gradual drop is a normal part of aging. By age 80, half of all men have low testosterone, according to the Urology Care Foundation.
But testosterone levels can fluctuate daily, and even change from hour to hour. They are highest in the morning, which is why doctors run blood tests for the hormone between 7 and 10 a.m.
Low testosterone in younger men
If a man in his thirties or forties has low testosterone, it may be the result of other health problems. Some conditions and factors the contribute to low testosterone are:
- Alcoholism.
- Obesity.
- Diabetes.
- HIV/AIDS.
- Hormone disorders.
- Kidney disease.
- Undergoing chemotherapy for cancer.
- Taking narcotic pain medicines (now one of the most common factors contributing to low testosterone in young men).
What Are the Symptoms of Low Testosterone?
When your body doesn’t make enough testosterone, it affects more than just your sex drive. You may notice other changes in your body. You may:
- Feel tired all the time.
- Lose muscle mass.
- Lose bone mass.
- Suffer from hair loss.
- Have enlarged or tender breasts.
- Suffer from erectile dysfunction.
- Have low energy.
- Experience fertility problems because of low sperm count.
Your doctor can order a blood test to determine your testosterone levels. Some of the symptoms of low testosterone are general and may have another cause.
Can You Treat Low Testosterone?
If you think you may have low testosterone, talk to your doctor. The symptoms of low testosterone are like those of many other conditions. You may have normal testosterone but have another health problem.
Remember, your testosterone levels gradually decrease as you get older. It’s a normal part of aging. However, there are ways to boost your testosterone at any age.
Lifestyle changes
Making healthy lifestyle choices is the first and most important step to boost testosterone. Your doctor may recommend that you:
- Eat a diet rich in lean proteins, eggs, colorful fruit and vegetables, whole grains, and legumes.
- Add more exercise to your daily routine.
- Lose weight.
- Improve your sleep habits.
- Cut down on or eliminate alcohol, soft drinks, refined sugars, and fast food.
- Quit smoking.
Testosterone hormone therapy
You may have seen ads for products that claim to boost testosterone. However, it’s always best to see a doctor and get a test to see if your testosterone levels are normal. If your testosterone levels are low, your doctor may prescribe a medical-grade testosterone replacement.
Doctors may prescribe testosterone therapy if:
- You have low levels of the hormone. They usually don’t recommend it for men who have normal testosterone levels.
- Your testicles get injured.
- Your testicles are surgically removed (e.g., from cancer).
Your doctor may give you testosterone therapy in the form of:
- Gels
- Creams
- Skin patches
- Pills
- Injections
If you have a normal age-related drop in testosterone, your doctor may not recommend testosterone therapy. The possible side effects of the therapy often outweigh the benefits.
Side effects of testosterone therapy
Your doctor will explain the potential side effects of testosterone therapy. They include:
- Accelerated growth of existing prostate cancer.
- Acne.
- Breast growth.
- Growth of benign prostatic hyperplasia (enlarged prostate).
- Heart problems.
- Reduced sperm production.
- Sleep problems.
- Testicle shrinkage.
Your doctor should always test your testosterone levels before beginning any therapy.
Sources
Urology Care Foundation, What Is Low Testosterone? Link
Harvard Health Publishing, Testosterone — What It Does and Doesn't Do, Link
National Institutes of Health, Understanding How Testosterone Affects Men, Link
Hormone Health Network, Testosterone and Androgens, Link
Hormone Health Network, What Does Testosterone Do? Link
U.S. National Library of Medicine, Testosterone Levels Test, Link
About Men’s Health Center
The UPMC Men’s Health Center evaluates and treats conditions affecting men’s sexual and reproductive health. With years of clinical experience in male sexual medicine and surgery, our team has treated a wide variety of conditions and performed thousands of surgeries. We are dedicated to providing patients the highest level of quality care. Our providers understand the intimate nature of male sexual difficulties, and we will work to help you restore your normal level of sexual function in a comfortable, educational, and discreet environment.Does testosterone replacement therapy cause hair loss?
In recent years, testosterone replacement therapy (TRT) has grown increasingly popular. However, the rise of specialized clinics and online pharmacies offering easy access to the hormone has outpaced the availability of reliable educational resources. As interest in testosterone replacement therapy grows, concerns have emerged — particularly about its potential side effects, such as hair loss. Baylor Medicine urologist Dr. Blair Stocks and dermatologist Dr. Oyetewa Asempa weigh in on these concerns and offer guidance for patients considering TRT.
TRT is used to increase the overall testosterone levels of a person, and it plays a key role in male characteristics, including hair growth. Testosterone is converted to its active form, dihydrotestosterone (DHT), by the enzyme 5-alpha reductase. Studies have shown that TRT can elevate DHT levels by 2 to 3 times above baseline, depending on the dose and route of administration (e.g., transdermal vs. intramuscular).
“DHT is a more potent androgen than testosterone and binds strongly to androgens receptors in the hair follicle,” says Stocks, assistant professor in the Scott Department of Urology at Baylor.
Over time, elevated DHT levels can cause hair follicles to shrink. The process, known as miniaturization, results in thinner hair. Eventually those follicles stop producing visible hair altogether.
The medical term for male pattern baldness is androgenetic alopecia (AGA). This is the most common type of hair loss in men. In most cases, this is a genetic condition that happens with age. In this condition, a person’s growth phase in their hair follicles is genetically programmed to start shortening over time, leading to finer, shorter and lighter hair.
Risk factors include:
- Family history (on either side).
- Age (can begin as early as puberty and worsen over time).
- Elevated androgen levels from medications like TRT.
There is no one-size-fits-all solution to reduce hair loss for patients undergoing TRT; instead, it could take a combination of therapies.
“This can be difficult, but we combine multiple therapies to slow down hair loss from TRT,” says Asempa, assistant professor of dermatology and director of the Skin of Color Clinic at Baylor. “We can stimulate hair growth with topical or oral minoxidil (5% foam or liquid is available over the counter, but we can prescribe high percentages). Other therapies to stimulate hair include platelet-rich plasma injections, microneedling, red-light therapies and mesotherapy (injections of minoxidil or other medications directly into the scalp).”
Medications such as finasteride or dutasteride that will block the enzyme 5-alpha reductase also are hair loss treatment options, Asempa says.
“At the right doses, these medications can generally lower activated testosterone in the hair follicle without altering the other benefits of TRT, but this must be done alongside that patient’s endocrine or urology team,” she said. “Additionally, we can review the TRT formulation or dose, as some men can have symptom control with lower dosages.”
Stocks emphasizes that patients considering TRT who are worried about hair loss should have a thorough conversation with their physician beforehand. Key points to cover include:
- Baseline hormone levels: Measuring your DHT and testosterone levels before starting treatment can help set realistic expectations.
- Formulation matters: Transdermal TRT (like gels or patches) may cause higher spikes in DHT compared to intramuscular injections, which could impact hair health.
- Preventive options: Discussing hair-preserving treatments such as finasteride before beginning TRT can help protect your hair follicles from potential damage.
If a patient plans to undergo TRT, and hair loss is a concern, it is important to bring up those concerns with the prescribing physician, in addition to a dermatologist.
“We work together to determine the right medication regimen for these patients,” Asempa says. “I never prescribe finasteride or dutasteride to a patient on TRT without first consulting the urology team. We can also work together by referring patients to each other and keeping in communication.”
By Alexandria Brown, senior marketing associate in the Scott Department of UrologyE-course: Male hypogonadism: Testosterone therapy is not dangerous
This e-course will be of great educational value for urologists as internationally-known experts will focus on the controversial and challenging areas of this rapidly evolving field, and provide you with vital insights.
Testosterone replacement therapy is indicated in a variety of clinical conditions and has shown to improve the quality of life in patients with hypogonadism. In addition, the therapy may also have other beneficial effects on long-term cardiovascular health. However, patients receiving testosterone replacement therapy should be fully counselled on the risks and advantages of the treatment.
The e-course will discuss the current EAU Guidelines and the evidence base for treating men with hypogonadism, as well as highlight controversial areas. The expert discussion will also provide an up-to-date guidance on the safety profile of testosterone replacement therapy focusing on the potential long-term cardiovascular effects and the potential risks on prostate health. The e-course will also highlight and discuss the effects of testosterone on bone metabolism.
Speakers:
- Dr. G. Corona (IT)
- Dr. P. Capogrosso (IT)
- Prof. A. Salonia (IT)
- Prof. S. Minhas (GB)
- Prof. T.H. Jones (GB)
This e-course is brought to you in collaboration with the EAU Guidelines office.Endocrinology in Men
At the Men’s Wellness Clinic, we help men with a range of hormonal and metabolic concerns, including:
- Low testosterone (hypogonadism)
- Diabetes
- Insulin resistance
- Hyperthyroidism and hypothyroidism
- Thyroid cancer
- Obesity
Our team uses evidence-based practices to treat hormonal issues in men, with the goal of significantly improving their quality of life.
Help for Low T and More
Treating low T isn’t just about starting hormone therapy. It is important to take a man’s overall health into consideration and determine the cause of the problem, which could be more than just normal aging. In other words, we don’t just treat the symptom. We look at multiple factors that can affect your hormones, such as your blood sugar and weight.
When you come to the Men’s Wellness Clinic, you can expect a comprehensive evaluation to understand the cause of your symptoms. From there, we will work with you to develop a treatment plan designed to help you feel like yourself again.
Our experts in endocrinology and urology carefully consider if, when and how testosterone may be used for treatment. We consider the whole person and work collaboratively with experts in urology and cardiology to optimize care for each patient.
A Leader in Diabetes Research and Care
Diabetes can affect a man’s sexual health as well as his heart, blood vessels, kidneys, skin, eyes and nerves. At the Men’s Wellness Clinic, we understand that managing diabetes requires a team approach, and we are always bringing the latest treatments to our patients.
Our patients have access to advanced therapies for diabetes through the Kovler Diabetes Center. Many of these treatments, including investigational medicines, are best used at academic medical centers with specialized expertise such as UChicago Medicine.
Science-Driven Weight Management
If you are struggling to lose weight, we understand how frustrating it can be. But you don’t have to do it on your own. We can connect you to a dietitian specializing in weight loss on our team at the Men’s Wellness Clinic.
We also can refer you to the Chicago Weight team. They offer a medically supervised weight loss program, as well as bariatric surgery, for those who qualify.
Frequently Asked Questions
If you have been feeling tired or weak or have noticed a drop in your sex drive, you may have low testosterone. At the Men’s Wellness Clinic, we can help uncover the cause of your symptoms and offer treatments to help you feel like yourself again.
Men with low thyroid hormone levels often feel tired. Sometimes, they may also gain weight. Other symptoms include dry skin, constipation and feeling very cold.
Men with high thyroid hormone levels often have the opposite symptoms. They may feel hot and sweaty and feel like their heart is racing. They may lose weight. But like men with low testosterone, they may also feel tired.
Sometimes, men with thyroid disease also experience symptoms of having low testosterone, meaning they feel weak and may notice a drop in their libido.
No, testosterone therapy itself does not improve fertility. In some cases, it can even reduce fertility. If you are experiencing infertility, we can refer you to a urologist at the Men’s Wellness Clinic who can offer potential solutions.
Yes, men’s testosterone levels decrease as they age, but not nearly as much as estrogen levels drop in women after menopause.
But sometimes, there’s another reason for the drop in testosterone. Men’s testes may not be making enough testosterone, or there may be an issue with the pituitary gland, which “signals” the testes to make testosterone.
Being able to distinguish between a “normal” decrease in testosterone and low levels that would benefit from treatment requires expertise, which is available at the Men’s Wellness Clinic.
A slight decrease in testosterone levels with age is normal. In these men, testosterone is not likely to improve symptoms.
But if a man’s testosterone level is low enough to meet the criteria for hypogonadism, he will probably feel better taking testosterone. Typically, this takes a few weeks, although it may take a few months to find the ideal level of testosterone.
Testosterone therapy comes in many forms: injections, patches and gels. You and your doctor can determine the best option based on your goals and preferences.
Testosterone therapy can cause the prostate to grow, although it is not believed to cause prostate cancer. However, if a man has existing prostate cancer, it can cause the prostate cancer cells to grow.
When you come to the Men’s Wellness Clinic, we can help you understand the pros and cons of testosterone therapy.
Diabetes and pre-diabetes can cause erectile dysfunction and infertility in some men. Low testosterone is also more common in men with diabetes.
Many men with diabetes also have an overactive bladder and urinary incontinence. Treatment can improve these symptoms.
Being overweight or obese can affect the levels of a certain protein called sex hormone binding globulin (SHBG) that carries testosterone and other hormones in the bloodstream. But that is only part of the picture. Doctors are still trying to understand how obesity, diabetes and sexual health are linked.
Some of the latest treatments include glucagon-like peptide-1 receptor agonists, also known as GLP-1 receptor agonists. These drugs, which were originally approved for treating type 2 diabetes, are also useful for weight management in some patients.
Our Physicians
Request an Appointment
We are currently experiencing a high volume of inquiries, leading to delayed response times. For faster assistance, please call 1-888-824-0200 to schedule your appointment.
If you have symptoms of an urgent nature, please call your doctor or go to the emergency room immediately.
* Indicates required fieldOne of the main treatments for erectile dysfunction, also called ED, is oral prescription medicine. This is medicine that you take by mouth.
But oral medicines aren't safe or effective for everyone with ED. If that's the case for you, your doctor or other health care professional might recommend nonoral treatments. These don't involve taking erectile dysfunction medicines by mouth.
Learn why you might choose a nonoral treatment for ED and how each kind works.
When oral medicines might not be safe
Not everyone can safely take oral medicine for erectile dysfunction. These medicines include avanafil (Stendra), sildenafil (Viagra), tadalafil (Cialis) and vardenafil.
Oral medicine for ED might not work or might be dangerous if you already take:
Nitrate medicines often prescribed for chest pain, also called angina.
Alpha-blocker medicines commonly prescribed for an enlarged prostate.
Medicine that affects an enzyme called CYP3A4.
Oral medicine for ED also might not be safe or effective if you have:
A recent history of heart or blood vessel problems. This includes a heart attack, stroke or a serious heart rhythm disorder in the past six months.
Very low blood pressure, called hypotension.
Uncontrolled high blood pressure, called hypertension.
Severe liver disease.
An inherited eye disease that affects the retina.
Kidney disease that needs to be treated with dialysis.
Some people with ED also might choose another treatment so they don't get side effects caused by certain oral medicines.
Other types of medicines
Nonoral medicines for erectile dysfunction are the kinds that you don't take by mouth. They include:
Self-injections. These are shots of medicine that you give yourself to get an erection. You use a fine needle to inject a prescription drug into the base or side of your penis. Often, this causes little pain. Some of the medicines used for self-injections are alprostadil (Caverject, Edex) and phentolamine (OraVerse).
The goal of this treatment is to produce an erection that lasts about 20 to 30 minutes. If an erection lasts longer than one hour, you'll need to have the medicine or dose changed. This lowers the risk of long-term health problems.
Self-injections can cause side effects. You might have bleeding from the shot. Or you might develop a painful erection that lasts over four hours, called priapism. Fibrous tissue also could form within the penis or at the injection site.
Alprostadil urethral suppository (Muse). This is a tiny, medicated pellet, called a suppository, that goes inside your penis. You use a special device to insert the suppository into your urethra, the tube through which urine leaves the body.
The erection usually starts within 10 minutes and lasts between 30 and 60 minutes. Side effects can include pain, a burning feeling and minor bleeding in the urethra.
Testosterone replacement. Some people have erectile dysfunction due to low levels of the hormone testosterone. In this case, you might benefit from testosterone replacement therapy. Most often, this treatment is prescribed along with ED medicine that you take by mouth.
Testosterone replacement therapy comes in many forms, including a shot, patch and pill. Talk to your health care team about your preference and the possible side effects.
Penis pumps, surgery and implants
Battery-powered penis pump for erectile dysfunction
Enlarge image
Close
Battery-powered penis pump for erectile dysfunction
Battery-powered penis pump for erectile dysfunction
A penis pump is used to draw blood into the penis to create an erection. You then place a rubber ring around the base of the penis to maintain the erection.
If medications don't work or aren't right for you, a different type of treatment might help. Other treatments include:
Penis pump. This also is called a vacuum erection device. It's a hollow tube with a hand-powered or battery-powered pump. The tube is placed over the penis. Then the pump is used to suck out the air inside the tube. This creates a vacuum that pulls blood into the penis.
Once you get an erection, you slip an elastic ring or band around the base of your penis. This helps hold in the blood and keeps the penis firm for up to 30 minutes. You then remove the vacuum device.
The erection often lasts long enough for a couple to have sex. You remove the tension ring after you have sex. Bruising of the penis can be a side effect. Ejaculation will be restricted by the ring or band. Your penis might feel cold to the touch.
If a penis pump sounds like a good option, ask your care team to recommend a specific model that will work well for you.
Penile implants. This treatment involves surgery to place devices into both sides of the penis. There are two main types of implants. One type uses rods that you can inflate. These let you control when and how long you have an erection. Another type of implant uses semirigid rods, which often are made of silicone. They keep the penis firm but bendable.
Often, penile implants aren't recommended until other methods have been tried first. Implants have a high degree of satisfaction among people who have tried other treatments that haven't worked. As with any surgery, there's a risk of complications, such as infection. And if a part of the device stops working, you'll likely need more surgery to replace it.
Blood vessel surgery. Rarely, erectile dysfunction is treated by bypassing arteries that have trouble bringing enough blood to the penis. This surgery is recommended for only a small percentage of people with ED. In general, you need to be younger than 55, a nonsmoker and in otherwise good health.
Psychological counseling
Sometimes, erectile dysfunction is caused by stress, anxiety or depression. ED also can create stress and relationship tension. If any of these issues affects you, seeing a psychologist or counselor might be a good next step. You also could think about asking your partner to join you for sessions with a certified sexual therapy counselor.
Don't ignore the underlying cause
It's key to get treatment for any medical issue that causes erectile dysfunction. This can help prevent related health problems and improve erections. Conditions that can cause ED or make it worse include:
Heart disease.
Diabetes.
Chronic kidney disease.
Obesity.
Depression, ongoing stress and other mental health conditions.
Alcohol or drug use disorders.
Tobacco use.
Some prescription drugs also can cause or play a role in ED. These include certain medicines for depression and high blood pressure. Don't stop or change any prescription medicines you take unless your provider tells you to.
If you have erectile dysfunction, you're not alone — and you have many treatment choices. Work with your health care team to find out which ED treatment might work best for you.
Erectile dysfunction care at Mayo Clinic
Our caring team of Mayo Clinic experts can help you with your health concerns. Visit Mayo Clinic Men's Health to
get started.
There is a problem with
information submitted for this request. Review/update the
information highlighted below and resubmit the form.
From Mayo Clinic to your inbox
Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.
Email
Address 1
ErrorEmail field is required
ErrorInclude a valid email address
Learn more about Mayo Clinic’s use of data.
We use the data you provide to deliver you the content you requested. To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, we may combine your email and website data with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, we will only use your protected health information as outlined in our Notice of Privacy Practices. You may opt out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the email.
Subscribe!
Thank you for subscribing!
You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.For men, low testosterone means high risk of severe COVID-19
New clues on why more men than women develop severe disease
Sara MoserThroughout the pandemic, doctors have seen evidence that men with COVID-19 fare worse, on average, than women with the infection. One theory is that hormonal differences between men and women may make men more susceptible to severe disease. And since men have much more testosterone than women, some scientists have speculated that high levels of testosterone may be to blame.
But a new study from Washington University School of Medicine in St. Louis suggests that, among men, the opposite may be true: that low testosterone levels in the blood are linked to more severe disease. The study could not prove that low testosterone is a cause of severe COVID-19; low levels could simply serve as a marker of some other causal factors. Still, the researchers urge caution with ongoing clinical trials investigating hormonal therapies that block or lower testosterone or increase estrogen as a treatment for men with COVID-19.
The study appears online May 25 in JAMA Network Open.
“During the pandemic, there has been a prevailing notion that testosterone is bad,” said senior author Abhinav Diwan, MD, a professor of medicine. “But we found the opposite in men. If a man had low testosterone when he first came to the hospital, his risk of having severe COVID-19 — meaning his risk of requiring intensive care or dying — was much higher compared with men who had more circulating testosterone. And if testosterone levels dropped further during hospitalization, the risk increased.”
The researchers measured several hormones in blood samples from 90 men and 62 women who came to Barnes-Jewish Hospital with symptoms of COVID-19 and who had confirmed cases of the illness. For the 143 patients who were admitted to the hospital, the researchers measured hormone levels again at days 3, 7, 14 and 28, as long as the patients remained hospitalized over these time frames. In addition to testosterone, the investigators measured levels of estradiol, a form of estrogen produced by the body, and IGF-1, an important growth hormone that is similar to insulin and plays a role in maintaining muscle mass.
Among women, the researchers found no correlation between levels of any hormone and disease severity. Among men, only testosterone levels were linked to COVID-19 severity. A blood testosterone level of 250 nanograms per deciliter or less is considered low testosterone in adult men. At hospital admission, men with severe COVID-19 had average testosterone levels of 53 nanograms per deciliter; men with less severe disease had average levels of 151 nanograms per deciliter. By day three, the average testosterone level of the most severely ill men was only 19 nanograms per deciliter.
The lower the levels of testosterone, the more severe the disease. For example, those with the lowest levels of testosterone in the blood were at highest risk of going on a ventilator, needing intensive care or dying. Thirty-seven patients — 25 of whom were men — died over the course of the study.
The researchers noted that other factors known to increase the risk of severe COVID-19, including advanced age, obesity and diabetes, also are associated with lower testosterone. “The groups of men who were getting sicker were known to have lower testosterone across the board,” said first author Sandeep Dhindsa, MD, an endocrinologist at Saint Louis University. “We also found that those men with COVID-19 who were not severely ill initially, but had low testosterone levels, were likely to need intensive care or intubation over the next two or three days. Lower testosterone levels seemed to predict which patients were likely to become very ill over the next few days.”
In addition, the researchers found that lower testosterone levels in men also correlated with higher levels of inflammation and an increase in the activation of genes that allow the body to carry out the functions of circulating sex hormones inside the cells. In other words, the body may be adapting to less testosterone circulating in the bloodstream by dialing up its ability to detect and use the hormone. The researchers don’t yet know the implications of this adaptation and are calling for more research.
“We are now investigating whether there is an association between sex hormones and cardiovascular outcomes in long COVID-19, when the symptoms linger over many months,” said Diwan, who is a cardiologist. “We also are interested in whether men recovering from COVID-19, including those with long COVID-19, may benefit from testosterone therapy. This therapy has been used in men with low levels of sex hormones, so it may be worth investigating whether a similar approach can help male COVID-19 survivors with their rehabilitation.”
This study used Washington University’s COVID-19 biorepository and was conducted as a collaboration of the university’s Institute of Clinical and Translational Sciences (ICTS), which includes Saint Louis University School of Medicine.Flu and COVID-19: Staying Healthy
- Conditions & Treatments
- Adult Health Library
- Allergy and Asthma
- Arthritis and Other Rheumatic Diseases
- Bone Disorders
- Breast Health
- Cardiovascular Diseases
- Complementary and Alternative Medicine
- Dermatology
- Diabetes
- Digestive Disorders
- Endocrinology
- Environmental Medicine
- Eye Care
- Gynecological Health
- Hematology and Blood Disorders
- Home Health, Hospice, and Elder Care
- Infectious Diseases
- Kidney and Urinary System Disorders
- Liver, Biliary, and Pancreatic Disorders
- Men's Health
- Mental Health Disorders
- Nervous System Disorders
- Non-Traumatic Emergencies
- Oral Health
- Orthopaedic Surgery
- Otolaryngology
- Pathology
- Pediatrics
- Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation
- Plastic Surgery
- Pregnancy and Childbirth
- Prostate Health
- Radiology
- Respiratory Disorders
- Skin Cancer
- Spine, Shoulder, and Pelvis Disorders
- Surgical Care
- Travel Medicine
- Women's Health
- Pediatric Health Library
- Adolescent Medicine
- Allergy, Asthma, and Immunology
- Blood Disorders
- Burns
- Cardiology
- Care of the Terminally Ill
- Child and Adolescent Mental Health
- Child Having Surgery
- Craniofacial Anomalies
- Common Childhood Injuries and Poisonings
- Dental and Oral Health
- Dermatology
- Diabetes Endocrinology
- Digestive and Liver Disorders
- Ear, Nose, and Throat
- Eye Care
- Genitourinary and Kidney Disorders
- Growth and Development
- High-Risk Newborn
- High-Risk Pregnancy
- Infectious Diseases
- Medical Genetics
- Neurological Disorders
- Normal Newborn
- Oncology
- Orthopaedics
- Pregnancy
- Respiratory Disorders
- Safety and Injury Prevention
- Transplantation
- Tests and Procedures
- Prevention Guidelines
- Adult Health Library
- Health Centers
- Drugs, Herbs & Supplements
- Nutrition & General Wellness
- Your Family
- News Center
- Healthy Living
- Tools & Multimedia
Free Testosterone
Does this test have other names?
Free T-index
What is this test?
This test measures the amount of unattached, or "free," testosterone in your blood.
Testosterone is a male sex hormone (androgen) that helps male features develop. Most testosterone is made in the testes (in men) and the ovaries (in women). A small amount is made in the adrenal glands.
Testosterone causes the changes that occur in boys during puberty. It helps hair, bone, and muscles grow. It also helps the penis and testes grow. Testosterone also causes a boy's voice to deepen. Men continue to make testosterone. It boosts sex drive and helps make sperm.
Women's ovaries also make small amounts of testosterone. It helps many organs and body processes in women.
The pituitary gland in your brain controls the amount of testosterone your body makes.
Most of the testosterone in your blood attaches to two proteins: albumin and sex hormone binding globulin. Some testosterone is free, which means that it isn't attached to proteins. Free testosterone and albumin-bound testosterone are also referred to as bioavailable testosterone. This is the testosterone that is easily used by your body.
If your doctor thinks that you have low or high testosterone, your total testosterone levels will be checked first. This looks at all three types of testosterone. The free testosterone can help give more information when total testosterone is low.
Both men and women can have health problems because of low or high levels of testosterone. Women with high levels of testosterone may have polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS). This condition can cause:
-
Infertility.
-
Lack of menstruation.
-
Acne.
-
Obesity.
-
Blood sugar problems.
-
Extra hair growth, especially on the face.
Men with low levels of testosterone (hypogonadism) may have:
-
Loss of sex drive.
-
Low energy.
-
Bone loss.
-
Infertility.
Testosterone levels in men drop as they age. But this is not considered to be hypogonadism. The FDA currently advises against treating men with low testosterone caused only by aging.
Why do I need this test?
You may need this test to find out whether a low sex drive is caused by a low level of testosterone. In recent years, doctors have used testosterone therapy to treat both men and women with low sex drives.
The test is also done for men with andropause, or late-onset hypogonadism. This is a condition caused by decreased testosterone. Men with this condition may have:
-
Anemia.
-
Depression.
-
Decreased bone density.
-
Lack of energy, or fatigue.
-
Loss of muscle mass.
-
Poor concentration.
-
Erectile dysfunction or inability to have an orgasm.
-
Infertility.
Men with HIV/AIDS may also have low testosterone levels.
Symptoms of high testosterone in women include:
-
Irregular or no menstruation.
-
Extra hair growth, especially on the face.
-
Blood sugar imbalance.
-
Infertility.
-
Thinning hair on the scalp.
If you are a man and this test shows that your free testosterone is lower than normal, your doctor may prescribe testosterone therapy. The FDA has not approved any testosterone medicines for women.
What other tests might I have along with this test?
Men may have other tests, including:
-
Blood tests for other hormones. These include tests to check levels of luteinizing hormone, follicle-stimulating hormone, thyroid-stimulating hormone, and prolactin. These are all hormones made by the pituitary gland.
-
Sperm analysis. This test counts the number of live sperm in the liquid that a man ejaculates. This test is often used to look for an infertility problem.
-
Testicular biopsy. This is a tissue sample from the testes.
-
MRI of the pituitary gland. This is an imaging test to look for growths on the gland.
Women may have other blood tests to check:
-
Androstenedione, total testosterone, and dehydroepiandrosterone sulfate. These are other types of androgen hormones.
-
LH, FSH, TSH, and prolactin. These are all hormones made by the pituitary gland.
-
Partial 21-hydroxylase deficiency. This condition affects the adrenal glands. High-risk groups for this condition include Ashkenazi Jews.
What do my test results mean?
Test results may vary depending on your age, gender, health history, and other things. Your test results may be different depending on the lab used. They may not mean you have a problem. Ask your doctor what your test results mean for you.
How is this test done?
The test is done with a blood sample. A needle is used to take blood from a vein in your arm or hand. This test is usually done in the morning because testosterone levels tend to be highest at that time. You may need to have this test more than once, and at different times of the day, to confirm low testosterone levels. This is because your testosterone level can change from morning to evening and from day to day.
Does this test pose any risks?
Having a blood test with a needle carries some risks. These include bleeding, infection, bruising, and feeling lightheaded. When the needle pokes your arm or hand, you may feel a slight sting or pain. Afterward, the site may be sore.
What might affect my test results?
Drinking a lot of alcohol can affect men's hormone levels. Obesity and diabetes can also affect men's testosterone levels.
For women, some health conditions, such as PCOS, can increase free testosterone.
How do I get ready for this test?
You don't need to prepare for this test. But make sure that your doctor knows about all medicines, herbs, vitamins, and supplements you are taking. This includes medicines that don't need a prescription and any illegal drugs you may use.
Online Medical Reviewer: Raymond Turley Jr PA-CYou have found what you’re looking for.
For over 11 years, our physician-led team at Full Potential HRT Clinic has been the Pacific Northwest’s premier destination for testosterone replacement therapy (TRT) for men, hormone replacement therapy (HRT) for women, and advanced anti-aging medicine. Beyond testosterone and HRT, we provide medical weight loss, sexual performance optimization, aesthetics, and regenerative joint therapies. Men and women across Portland and Seattle metros choose Full Potential HRT Clinic because our care is physician-led, highly personalized, clinically proven, and delivered with unmatched service. Discover what sets us apart.
Our Most Sought After Services
Hormone Replacement Therapies
Most people inevitably experience severe testosterone deficiency and other hormone deficiencies as a result of andropause or menopause. For men this usually happens around age 40. For women this usually happens around age 50. However, many people suffer from severe testosterone deficiency and other hormone deficiencies at a much younger age. These deficiencies become worse over time and can cause tremendous suffering as well as increased risk for various age-related chronic diseases. For this reason, hormone replacement therapy is the foundation of our anti-aging and regenerative approach to our patients’ health and longevity.
Testosterone (TRT) for Men Hormones (HRT) for Women in Their 20s-30s Hormones (HRT) for Women in Perimenopause Hormones (HRT) for Women in Menopause HGH Boosting Peptides HGH Therapy
Semaglutide & Tirzepatide Weight Loss
Many people are unable to maintain a healthy weight or lose weight even when they try everything they can think of to lose weight. Clinical trials have proven that most people who are overweight and who cannot lose weight despite diet and lifestyle changes are actually suffering from a chronic severe hormone deficiency of the peptide hormones GLP-1 and GIP. We can now add GLP-1 and GIP peptide hormone deficiency to the long list of hormone deficiencies that are proven to cause overweight and obesity. In our experience, hormone replacement therapy with either semaglutide or tirzepatide to replace deficient levels of these peptide hormones has been a very safe and successful approach to medical weight loss treatment.
Testosterone & Fertility Increasing Therapy for Men
Almost all men who suffer from low testosterone also suffer from low fertility. For men for whom fertility is a major concern we prescribe testosterone maximizing therapy (TMT) to increase their own ability to make more of their own testosterone and to increase their fertility by prescribing medications and other treatments that enlarge their testicles and increase their testicular functional capacity. This membership is the foundation of our approach to providing many of our male patients with anti-aging and regenerative medicine to help them to experience their full potential health and longevity for whom fertility is also a major concern.
Sexual Health and Performance Therapies
Most people inevitably experience trouble with erectile dysfunction or other aspects of their sexual health and performance as a result of andropause or menopause. However, many people suffer with these difficulties at a much younger age. These are serious issues that can have devastating consequences on someone’s quality of life and health. For this reason, we have developed a variety of sexual health and performance therapies, ranging from short-term “in-the-moment” therapies, such as oral, sublingual, and injectable medications to true anti-aging and regenerative therapies, such as our proprietary POTENTwave™ and POTENTshot™ procedures for men, and Better Orgasm Wave™ and Better Orgasm Shot™ procedures for women.
Women’s Sexual Health POTENTshot™ – Pshot® Alternative for Men POTENTwave™ – GAINSWave® Alternative for Men Trimix Injections for Erectile Dysfunction
Aesthetics Therapies
Everyone inevitably experiences signs of aging of their skin and hair. Whether it’s general thinning, drying, and dulling of their skin, or the appearance of blemishes, fine lines, and wrinkles, it’s often an undesirable or unpleasant experience. We have successfully treated many patients with aesthetics therapies, such as microneedling and platelet-rich plasma facials, as well as with Botox® and Jeauveau®. We have also helped many patients who suffer from undesirable hair loss to better manage their hair loss with platelet-rich plasma hair restoration treatments and other therapies.
Learn more about microneedling treatments. Learn more about platelet-rich plasma facials. Learn more about BOTOX® Cosmetic and Jeuveau® treatments. Learn more about platelet-rich plasma hair restoration treatments.Regenerative Joint Injection Therapies
Most people inevitably experience joint dysfunction and pain due to sports or physical activities or due to aging. Joint dysfunction and pain can have devastating consequences on our mobility and independence, and therefore on our quality of life, health, and longevity. We have successfully treated many patients with regenerative joint injection therapies, ranging from prolotherapies, platelet-rich plasma injection therapies, prolozone therapies, peptide therapies, and other injection therapies, as well as with combinations of these therapies in order to heal, regenerate, or anti-age injured or aged joints.
We Have Helped Thousands of Men & Women Just Like You
Are you suffering from symptoms and diseases we’ve all been told are just an inevitable part of getting older, when in fact they’re really caused by low testosterone and possibly by low levels of other hormones, which can be treated?
Are you suffering from erectile dysfunction or other sexual health complaints? Have you been told that this is just another inevitable result of getting older? Are you wondering if there’s any way that you can have a robust and vibrant, enjoyable sex life again?
Are you suffering from chronic joint and body injuries and pain that are preventing you from enjoying your mobility and activities?
Are you getting older, and wanting to keep your younger, thicker, smoother, and more vibrant-appearing skin?
Are you having trouble preventing weight gain or losing weight despite doing everything that you can think of in terms of diet, exercise, and other lifestyle measures?
If so, then it’s really important that you see a doctor with expertise and successful experience evaluating and managing these diseases by prescribing testosterone and comprehensive hormone replacement therapy, and other anti-aging and regenerative therapies for men and women.
Our distinguished team of physicians and staff has more than 10 years of experience successfully treating thousands of men and women near Portland, Oregon and Seattle, Washington, helping them to live and perform to their full potential quality of life, health, and longevity.
Call (971) 438-2700 for more information or help with scheduling an appointment.
Click here to request a call to answer any questions you may have or to schedule an appointment.Diagnosing Low Testosterone at Cleveland Clinic
Testosterone helps develop and maintain your sex organs, muscle mass, bone density, sex drive and even red blood cell levels. It can also affect your overall sense of well-being. Your testicles make and release testosterone. And your pituitary gland and hypothalamus control the amount of this hormone in your body.
Hormone levels decline as you age, but that isn’t the only reason you may have low testosterone. Maybe you injured your testicles or have an infection. Or you might’ve been born with undescended testicles or a genetic condition that causes your testicles not to make enough testosterone.
When testicular conditions cause low testosterone, it’s called primary hypogonadism. If it turns out low testosterone levels are linked to your hypothalamus or pituitary gland, then you have secondary hypogonadism.
A low sex drive and erectile dysfunction (ED) are two main signs of low testosterone, but you may have other symptoms, too, like, low energy, fuzzy thinking and increased body fat with less muscle mass. When you notice these symptoms, it’s time to get help.
What to expect at your first visit
Talking about your testicles and your sex life may feel a bit uncomfortable. But we’re used to it. That’s what we do every day. You can count on us to make you feel at ease and more confident in sharing your story with us.
At your appointment, your provider will answer your questions and ask a few of their own, like:
- What symptoms have you noticed?
- How long have you had them?
- How are they affecting your life?
- What prescription or over-the-counter medications do you take?
- Do you smoke or take recreational drugs?
- Do you drink alcohol and, if so, how often?
- What other health conditions do you have?
During this visit, your provider will also do a physical exam to look for any signs and symptoms of low testosterone. You may also get orders for different blood tests to check your testosterone levels and rule out other conditions with similar symptoms. These could include:
Meet Our Low Testosterone Team
When you come to Cleveland Clinic, you’ll get a handpicked care team of providers from different specialties who’ll guide your diagnosis, treatment and follow-up care. These providers are chosen based on your needs and may include:
This team works together to confirm your diagnosis. Once they pinpoint the cause, they’ll craft a treatment plan based on your specific needs.
0 Providers Who Treat Low Testosterone
Locations
Our healthcare providers see patients at convenient locations throughout Northeast Ohio and Florida.
Treating Low Testosterone at Cleveland Clinic
Treating low testosterone isn’t a “one-and-done” process like taking a single pill. You’ll start ongoing testosterone replacement therapy (TRT) to rebalance your hormone levels and reduce or eliminate the symptoms that come with it. You may have:
Your care team will go over which of these treatments is best for you based on your symptoms, test results and treatment goals. We’ll also work with you to help you stop smoking, avoid too much alcohol and drug use, manage your weight and eat a healthy diet. We’ll even diagnose and help treat sleep apnea, if you have it.
Taking the Next Step
Even though testosterone levels drop throughout your life, you don’t have to live with the symptoms. We’re here to help you find out what’s causing your low testosterone and start the right testosterone replacement treatment for you. Our skilled and compassionate healthcare providers listen carefully and guide you through what to expect as you move ahead with treatment.
Appointments
Getting an appointment with Cleveland Clinic’s low testosterone experts is easy. We help you get the care you need.
Billing & Insurance
Manage your Cleveland Clinic account. Find billing information and financial assistance, plus FAQs.
MyChart
Securely access your personal health information at any time, day or night.How Aging Can Impact Testosterone
When testosterone is mentioned, what comes to mind? Masculinity or “manliness,” muscle growth or sex drive? Technically, none of those are wrong. It does, however, impact much more than that.
Understanding testosterone’s role
Testosterone is a vital hormone in the human body, especially for men. It influences muscle mass, bone density, mood and sexual health. With age, testosterone levels naturally decline, but too-low levels may require attention.
Produced primarily in the testicles, testosterone affects:
- Muscle and bone strength
- Sex drive and performance
- Mood and energy levels
- Red blood cell production
Women also produce testosterone in smaller amounts, which contribute to their overall health.
How age plays a part
Testosterone levels are measured in nanograms per deciliter (ng/dL). According to the National Institutes of Health (NIH), normal ranges for healthy, non-obese men ages 19 to 39 are approximately 264 to 916 ng/dL.
As men age, testosterone levels begin to decline, typically around 1% per year after age 30.
Signs of low testosterone
Also known as hypogonadism, low testosterone can lead to various symptoms, including:
- Decreased sex drive
- Erectile dysfunction
- Fatigue or low energy
- Mental health issues or mood swings
- Loss of muscle mass
- Increased body fat
It’s important to note these symptoms can also be brought on by other health issues. Always consult with a healthcare provider when it comes to seeking diagnoses and determining the next steps.
Testosterone and mental health
Research indicates both high and low levels of testosterone as a possible risk factor for depression and anxiety.
Lower levels of testosterone may be associated with the following symptoms:
- Feelings of sadness or hopelessness
- Increased irritability, anger or aggression
- Difficulty concentrating
- Lack of motivation
- Sleep problems
When to see a doctor
If you notice symptoms associated with low levels of testosterone, it may be time to reach out to your provider. With proper testing, they can help devise a plan of action that’s right for you.
Hormones like testosterone play a key role in more than just physical strength or libido – they affect our everyday experience as humans. With a hand in mood regulation, metabolism, energy and overall well-being, hormonal health is a part of the body’s entire system. Understanding your own is taking a powerful step toward maintaining your best health.
To schedule an appointment, call 888-449-3627
Sources: National Institutes of Health; medlineplus.govHealth Tips for the Aging Man
- Category: Primary Care
Men’s Guide to Navigating the Road to Older Age
As men continue to age, they may go through many hormonal and physical changes throughout their bodies. While the extent of these experiences can vary from man to man, it is essential to prepare for them later in life. Here are some tips to help men navigate the changes they may experience as they transition into their senior years.
Dealing with Hormonal Changes
Similarly to women going through menopause, men experience a drop in their production of the hormone testosterone. The symptoms associated with a steady decline is typically referred to as andropause, testosterone deficiency syndrome, androgen deficiency, or hypogonadism.
While it is usually compared to menopause, it is important to note that andropause is not the male equivalent to female menopause. Men do not lose their ability to reproduce and it does not necessarily affect all men at some point in their life.
Signs and Symptoms
With a decline in the production of testosterone, it is normal for men to experience physical, emotional, and sexual changes.
Some common symptoms associated with andropause include:
- Decreased sex drive
- Fatigue and tiredness
- Loss of muscle mass
- Mood swings and irritability
- Erectile dysfunction (ED)
- Depression
- Self-consciousness
While the symptoms themselves can seem overwhelming, luckily there are ways to manage them and their severity.
- Eat a balanced diet
- Get regular exercise
- Get 7-9 hours of quality sleep each night
- Manage your stress levels
Get Up and Get Moving
According to the American Heart Association, adults should aim to get 150 minutes of moderate-intensity exercise each week. While many of us know that being physically active can help you to stay in shape and build muscle—it can help to support various areas of your health.
Reduces Risk of Chronic Illness
While we’ve all heard that getting exercise is good for you, it’s essential to understand what staying physically active is actually protecting you from.
Adding regular exercise to your routine can help to:
- Reduce your risk of heart disease
- Manage your insulin levels
- Reduce your risk of some cancers including colon, breast, and lung cancer
- Maintain a healthy weight, reducing risk of obesity
Prevents Osteoporosis
Just like your muscles, the tissue in your bones becomes stronger with regular physical activity. You also help to build up the muscle that surrounds your bones and joints, making you less likely to experience fractures and other orthopedic injuries.
Supports Healthy Brain Function
With age, our brains decrease in size and in cognitive function. With regular exercise, your brain released chemicals and proteins that help to maintain the structure and function of your brain cells.
Helps You Effectively Manage Stress
Older people tend to spend more time indoors, sitting or laying down which can bring on negative and distressing emotions. With regular exercise, your brain will release endorphins that can trigger positive emotions and a sense of wellbeing. This is especially true if you use physical exercise as an opportunity to interact with others.
Stay Up-to-Date on Colorectal Cancer Screenings
Colorectal cancer is the third most common type of non-skin cancer in men, affecting about 5% of American men at some point in their lifetime. Typically, this form of cancer develops from pre-cancerous polyps that are found in the colon. When these growths are found early, they can be surgically removed before they have the chance to become cancerous—making routine screenings necessary when it comes to early detection and prevention.
Men of average risk should begin getting regular colon cancer screening from the age of 50 until the age of 75. The type of test you have done helps to determine how frequently you should have colorectal cancer screenings:
- Highly sensitive fecal immunochemical test (FIT): Annually
- Highly sensitive guaiac-based fecal occult blood test (gFOBT): Annually
- Multi-targeted stool DNA test (MT-sDNA): Every 3 years
- Colonoscopy: Every 10 years
- CT colonography (virtual colonoscopy): Every 5 years
- Flexible sigmoidoscopy (FSIG): Every 5 years
If you are at an increased risk for colon cancer, it is important to speak with your gastroenterologist to determine how frequently you should be screened.
Primary and Specialty Care in Henry County
At Henry County Hospital, we’ve been providing compassionate healthcare since 1919. When it comes to primary and specialty care, each patient can expect individualized care that meets their needs. From education to emotional support, we focus on your individual health and wellness.Testosterone tends to be a hot topic, with plenty of ads pushing the miraculous, anti-aging benefits of testosterone supplements, while many medical experts warn of dangerous side effects.
Understanding testosterone’s purpose is the first step to figuring out more about the hormone (and why some people think they need a little extra). So, what exactly is going on with testosterone?
The real deal with testosterone
The quick and dirty? Testosterone is a steroidal hormone that serves as the primary sex hormone in men and people assigned male at birth and is produced by the testicles (though the adrenal glands also contribute a small amount). Like other hormones, it is secreted into the bloodstream where it is carried throughout the body.
“Testosterone is responsible for driving pubertal changes during male adolescence, such as development and maturation of the male sex organs, production of sperm, deepening of the voice, and growth of body hair,” says Dr. Jeremy Choy, a male reproductive endocrinologist who works at the Men’s Health Center at University of Washington Medical Center – Roosevelt.
He also adds that testosterone is a driver of sexual function in adult men, promoting libido, erectile function and fertility — plus it’s a crucial element of maintaining muscle mass and bone density.
Other ways that your body may respond to testosterone? Well, those charming tufts of ear hair and the extra nose fuzz that some men notice as they grow older can be blamed on decades of exposure to the hormone, as can male pattern baldness.
When testosterone levels are out of whack
When it comes to producing not enough testosterone, Dr. Bradley Anawalt, a hormone specialist and UW Medical Center’s chief of medicine, notes that it can get confusing for patients.
Though there are many reasons why testosterone levels can be low — anything from being overweight to aging to having health issues like diabetes — hypogonadism is the term used when there is an actual deficiency in testosterone levels.
Anawalt explains that, in usual circumstances, the man’s hypothalamus, a structure at the base of the brain, stimulates the pituitary gland to release two hormones, luteinizing hormone and follicle-stimulating hormone, that stimulate the testes to produce testosterone and sperm.
“So, if you have a problem anywhere on that track, then you can get testosterone deficiency,” says Anawalt, “and those men may develop fragile bones due to osteoporosis or low bone density, muscle weakness, and decreased muscle mass. Their blood count may go down, and their sexual drive and function typically decline. There are real side effects of having testosterone deficiency.”
When it comes to discussing testosterone levels that are too high, Choy thinks it’s important to distinguish between whether the levels are high due to endogenous overproduction (which is less common) or high because of an outside source, like hormonal supplementation.
“In the latter case, we see adverse effects such as mood instability, acne breakouts and overproduction of red blood cells, which can increase a man’s risk of thromboembolic events [dangerous blood clots],” says Choy. “Too much testosterone can also drive the generation of too much estrogen, upsetting the balance between the hormones and causing problems with fertility, sexual dysfunction and even development of breast tissue.”
Figuring out your testosterone levels
When it comes to measuring testosterone levels, you’ll find that it’s not something that your doctor is going to routinely check — so you’ll want to let them know if you’re experiencing symptoms that could be associated with hypogonadism, like low libido or decreased energy.
If you decide to test your levels with the blood test, check them in the morning when they are naturally at their highest. According to Anawalt, if levels are tested in the evening, 15 to 30% of the time they’ll be low in men with normal testosterone production — which leads to overdiagnosing testosterone deficiency. You’ll need to take two tests that show low levels to confirm the diagnosis.
Heads up — there has also long been a struggle to make sure clinics and doctors are on the same page about what constitutes a “normal” level, which is why the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) recently created a standardization program for testosterone because there was too much variance between clinical laboratories across the nation. This is why Anawalt recommends that if your testosterone is reported to be low, to ask your doctor if the measurement was done by laboratory that has been certified by the CDC.
Testosterone treatments and therapies
Anawalt also notes that most people who come in thinking they have testosterone deficiency don’t need testosterone therapy, as there are usually other ways to fix their issue. Millions of men over age 40 have testosterone levels that are a little low, and it’s related to other health problems.
For example, weight. As you gain weight, your testosterone levels tend to decline.
“Weight reduction surgeries and medications that cause weight loss will help raise the testosterone levels in men that are overweight and have low testosterone. So, they don’t need testosterone per se, they often will benefit from weight loss alone,” says Anawalt.
You don’t just throw testosterone supplements at the problem; you need to treat the real cause. And aside from weight, some other conditions and illnesses result in “turning off” the natural testosterone-creating process, so it’s important to consult with your doctor and make sure you understand the real source of the issue.
So, what happens if you actually have testosterone deficiency? Well, luckily there are plenty of treatment options available that are approved by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA). You can take pills twice a day or even get an injection once a week or every two weeks. Another popular option is either a patch or a gel that can be directly applied to the skin daily — typically on the shoulders and upper arms.
“Just be careful if you’re putting testosterone on your shoulder that you don’t rub the skin of a baby or the skin of a female because there are reports of the testosterone transferring to other people,” says Anawalt.
Testosterone gel that does get transferred by mistake can sometimes cause unintended (and not-so-pleasant) consequences. Things like excess body hair growth in women, a deepening voice or interrupted menstruation cycles. If it rubs off on a child? It can cause premature puberty.
How do women fit into all of this?
Another interesting testosterone fact? Women do also have testosterone, though the ovaries and adrenal glands make theirs. They produce a lot less of the hormone than men, but still, it plays a significant role in their libido, their level of energy, their fertility and the health of their bones and muscles.
Women can also experience low testosterone — especially as they get older — which is something that they should discuss with their doctor if they have concerns.
Myth busting: The testosterone edition
Curious about that thing your friend or your friend’s friend told you about testosterone? Same here. Enter: our experts.
“I think the biggest myth is that testosterone is going to make you a better sex partner,” says Anawalt. Since most people consider testosterone to be the sex hormone, there’s this idea that if you take testosterone, you perform better and that sex will be better. “There’s this notion that if my testosterone levels are on the low end of normal and if I add more, I’ll be a much better lover — and that’s just not true, it’s a myth.”
For Choy, the most important myth to debunk involves testosterone and increasing fertility.
“Testosterone is indeed a necessary ingredient for sperm production, but the key is that the testosterone needs to be produced from the man’s testicles. Treating with exogenous testosterone [from supplements, etc.] will suppress that testicular testosterone production, leading to infertility,” he says.
Takeaways
What have we learned? Testosterone is a bit complicated. It doesn’t just affect men; it can be too high or too low — but in different kinds of ways, and there are a variety of treatments you can look into with the help of your doctor.
So, maybe now that you are armed with a little extra information about testosterone, you can take the latest flashy testosterone supplement advertisement with just the tiniest grain of salt.Our Hospitals
Visitor Information
Our Services
Emergency Care Hub
Live waiting times for A&E and Urgent Treatment Centres
News from NCIC
Keep up to date with the latest news or sign up to our newsletter
Stay well this winter
Latest news from NCIC - September 2025 newsletter
Community Diagnostic Centre (Workington)
North Cumbria NHS Hospitals Charity
HUMAN campaign tackles violence and aggression
Careers at NCIC
Support and Advice
Join us as a memberThank you to Everyone Who Joined us for the 7th Annual Meeting Virtually or In-Person!
We held two full days of engaging and innovative sessions in San Francisco this July featuring speakers from all over the world. We're so glad you helped make this year's meeting such a great success!
Thank you Androgen 2025 Faculty!
Welcome to the Androgen Society!
The Androgen Society is the first professional medical society dedicated entirely to testosterone deficiency (hypogonadism) and its treatment!
The Androgen Society brings together clinicians and investigators from all disciplines to share the latest research information together with clinical expertise.
The mission of the Androgen Society is to promote excellence in research, education, and clinical practice regarding testosterone deficiency and its treatment. Our vision is to provide a home for all the various disciplines involved with testosterone, including endocrinology, urology, sexual medicine, andrology, general medicine, epidemiology, and cardiology.
By sharing knowledge and ideas, we hope to propel the field forward, for the benefit of our patients, public health, and science.
The mission of the Androgen Society is to promote excellence in research, education, and clinical practice regarding testosterone deficiency and its treatment.Low-Testosterone
Testosterone is a hormone produced by the human body that helps boys develop men’s features, such as muscle strength and mass, facial and body hair, and a deeper voice. It can also affect your sex drive, erections, emotional state, bone density, and sperm production.
Signs of low levels of testosterone (called low-T) include low sex drive, weaker and fewer erections than before, and wanting sex less often. Low-T also causes non-sexual signs, including an increase in body fat, lower energy, reduced muscle mass, depression, low iron (anemia), and decreased bone density.
Possible Causes
Low-T can be caused by a number of conditions, including:
- Alcohol use
- Chronic liver or kidney disease
- Depression
- High blood pressure
- High cholesterol
- HIV/AIDS
- Hormonal disorders
- Infection
- Injury to the testicles
- Stress and anxiety
- Testicular cancer (or treatment for testicular cancer)
- Thyroid problems
- Type 2 diabetes
Diagnosis and Treatment
We test testosterone levels with a blood test. If your testosterone level falls below about 300 nanograms per deciliter (ng/dL), we call it low-T.
We use hormone replacement therapy to treat low levels of testosterone level in your blood. In addition to erectile dysfunction, low testosterone can cause decreased sex drive (libido), fatigue, depression, decreased muscle strength, weakened bones, and difficulty with memory and concentration.
We typically administer testosterone replacement therapy using intramuscular injections, gels, patches, or long-term pellets that we insert under the skin. Oral hormone replacement therapy is not approved in the United States because it can result in liver damage. Men with prostate or breast cancer are not candidates for hormone replacement therapy because it can result in the growth of cancerous prostate or breast tissue. Potential side effects include increased cholesterol levels and red cell count and decreased sperm count.How a man’s fertility changes over time
Do men have biological clocks?
Not necessarily, but their fertility does change as they age, said Dr. Carolina Jorgez, assistant professor in the Scott Department of Urology at Baylor College of Medicine.
“There is a misconception that men’s fertility lasts forever,” Jorgez said. “But there is andropause – a gradual process in which the quality and quantity of men sperm decreases.”
During andropause, there’s a decline in testosterone levels and a man’s testicular tissue can deteriorate, she added. Men can experience andropause when they enter their 40s. According to the National Institutes of Health, andropause symptoms can include loss of libido and erectile dysfunction.
As men get older, their sperm also ages and can introduce single mutations to an embryo, said Dr. Thomas Garcia, assistant professor in the Scott Department of Urology. But that doesn’t mean the mutation is automatically dangerous to the embryo.
“Most genes have two copies, and if there’s a damaging mutation on one copy, it’s not that bad,” Garcia said. “You need both copies of the gene to lose function. For most mutations, it’s needs to be both (copies).”
High fevers and other physiological problems can affect a man’s fertility, but the sperm may not change until three months later. More than 10 percent of American men are infertile, Garcia said. Causes range from obstruction, cryptorchidism, low sperm counts and lower testosterone levels.
Testing for infertility in men is simpler than the process is for women, Jorgez said. The initial testing includes semen analysis to determine the quantity and quality of the sperm and hormonal analysis. In cases where there is no sperm in the semen, doctors will conduct a testicular sperm extraction, a surgical procedure where tissue is removed from a part of a testicle to try to find sperm that can be used in assisted reproductive technology, she said.
Unlike women who typically start experiencing lower fertility when they turn 35, most men can father children well into their elder years.
Dr. Michael Eisenberg, a urologist and male fertility specialist at Stanford Medicine, is a former fellow in Baylor’s urology department. In 2017, Eisenberg co-authored several papers on the rising age of fathers in the U.S.
Advanced paternal age is associated with negative effects on both mothers and babies, Jorgez said. Higher paternal age, which is considered over the age of 45, is associated with an increased risk of premature birth, low birth weight, gestational diabetes and early-onset cancer and neuropsychiatric disease in babies.
Although it’s known that advanced paternal age can be associated with disease, neonatal screenings are not as common as when the mother is older, she said.
“Paternal age is rising within the U.S. among all regions, races and education levels,” according to the paper. “Given the implications for offspring health and demographic patterns, further research on this trend is warranted.”
Jorgez believes the conversation surrounding older first-time fathers is cultural rather than biological, as it can be with older first-time mothers. She referenced Eisenberg’s work as an example.
“Sometimes men in their 60s will have a child with a woman in her 30s,” Jorgez said. “When the child is in college, maybe their father has passed or they’re very elderly, so they cannot concentrate in college because they’re worried about their older parent.”
Learn about Lester and Sue Smith Urology Clinic at Baylor Medicine.
By Julie GarciaFor men, testosterone is a sex hormone that plays many important roles throughout various stages of life. It helps the body grow and develop masculine characteristics.
The pituitary gland, located at the base of the brain, sends signals to the testes to produce testosterone. This hormone is then released in the blood and carried throughout the body.
Testosterone affects many different parts of the body, including:
- Bone growth and strength
- Deepening of the voice during puberty
- Energy and mood
- Facial and pubic hair growth during puberty
- Muscle mass and strength
- Production of red blood cells
- Sex drive, or libido
- Sperm production
Signs and Symptoms of Low Testosterone
When your body doesnâ€™t produce enough testosterone, many bodily functions are affected. In men, symptoms of low testosterone, also called testosterone deficiency, vary greatly and can include:
- Decreased muscle mass
- Depressed mood
- Difficulty concentrating
- Erectile dysfunction
- Hot flashes
- Increased body fat
- Increased breast size
- Insulin resistance
- Irritability
- Loss of bone strength and increased risk of fracture
- Loss of body and facial hair
- Trouble sleeping
- Low sex drive
- Low sperm count
Keep in mind that many of these symptoms can be signs of other conditions or a normal part of the aging process. But if you notice changes in your body that concern you, talk to your primary care provider.
What Causes Low Testosterone?
In many men, levels of testosterone drop naturally as they age. This happens gradually, about 1 to 2 percent per year, as the testes produce lower amounts of hormone.
But other problems can lead to more rapid testosterone loss that isnâ€™t normal. Some causes include:
- Chronic illness or infection
- Genetic diseases such as Klinefelter syndrome and hemochromatosis
- Injury to the testicles
- Low thyroid function
- Obesity
- Problems with the hypothalamus or pituitary glands, including tumors, infections and autoimmune conditions
- Side effects of certain medications, such as hormones used to treat prostate cancer
- Use of prescription and anabolic steroids
- Narcotic use
- Side effects of certain treatments, such as chemotherapy and radiation
- Poor sleep
- Lack of regular aerobic exercise
- Stress
- Testicular cancer
Risks of Low Testosterone
Having testosterone deficiency can affect your health in many ways, including:
- Increased risk of atherosclerosis, and therefore risk of heart attack and stroke
- Increased mortality
- Insulin resistance and Type 2 diabetes
- Metabolic syndrome
- Obstructive sleep apnea
- Weight gain
- Increased risk of high-grade prostate cancer
- Erectile dysfunction
- Decreased libido
- Decreased energy
Diagnosing and Treating Low Testosterone
To determine whether your symptoms are the result of low testosterone, as well as the best way to treat it, your provider will:
- Perform a physical exam
- Review your health history to determine if another condition could be causing your symptoms
- Do blood tests to check your testosterone level. Because levels of this hormone can fluctuate, it may be necessary to do several tests.
If you are diagnosed with low testosterone, your provider will likely order additional tests before determining the best course of treatment. You may need a bone density test to determine if you have or are at risk for osteoporosis, as low testosterone can make bones brittle. In this case, your treatment may include medication for osteoporosis.
For some men, testosterone replacement therapy (TRT) can help resolve symptoms and help them feel better. Many older men, as well as young men with very low testosterone, can benefit from this treatment. However, TRT also comes with risks, and itâ€™s not appropriate for everyone. The Endocrine Society recommends that only men who display several symptoms and show low levels of testosterone in blood tests go on TRT.Â
Your provider may recommend other lifestyle changes before prescribing TRT. For example, if you have gained weight, regular aerobic exercise (a minimum of 30 minutes 3 days a week during which your heart rate goes up) and getting good sleep (at least 8 hours a night) will increase your testosterone levels. If you are on a medication that affects testosterone, your provider might change your treatment plan.
Benefits and Risks of TRT for Low Testosterone
Keep in mind you may not be a candidate for TRT if you were diagnosed with prostate or breast cancer, have an elevated level of prostate-specific antigen in your blood, or have a prostate nodule that your doctor feels during an exam.
TRT comes with risks, which include:
- Temporary infertility
- Elevated hematocrit
- Blood clots (rare)
- Swelling of the ankles or hands (rare)
- Acne (rare)
Due to these risks, you should not take TRT if you have:
- A condition called thrombophilia, in which you are at higher risk for developing blood clots
- A desire to become a father in the near future
- Elevated red blood cell counts
- Symptoms of low urinary tract problems
- Untreated sleep apnea
But men who are able to take TRT often see results fairly quickly, within four to six weeks of beginning therapy. However, itâ€™s important to note that some changes, like building muscles, can take up to six months.
TRT is available in many different forms, including:
- Gels: Topical gels should be spread on the upper arms, shoulders or thighs once per day.
- Injections: Different amounts of testosterone get injected into the patient every one to two weeks. These injections may cause levels to spike and then slowly drop off, creating a mood and energy boost before trailing off.
- Oral medication: You can swallow capsules or attach tablets to your inner cheek twice per day.
- Pellets: Your provider will implant these under the skin around the hips or buttocks. Pellets need to be replaced every three to six months.
- Skin patch: The patch, which you apply every 24 hours in the evening, releases small amounts of testosterone into the skin.
After starting TRT, be sure to see your provider regularly. He or she will keep a close eye on your testosterone levels and watch for any possible side effects.
More to Read
- Healthy Prostate Pointers
- How to Spot the Signs of Benign Prostatic Hyperplasia (Enlarged Prostate)
- Prostate Cancer: What Men Need to Know
- Signs of Testicular Cancer
Medically reviewed by Christopher Runz, DO.Like every couple, you and your man go through your share of ups and downs. You laugh, you bicker and then you kiss, make up and more (wink, wink).
But there may come a time in your relationship when you notice he’s just not that into sex anymore. What gives?
“A lack of sex drive is the best symptomatic marker for a low testosterone,” explains Dr. John Amory, a primary care physician who sees patients at the Men’s Health Center at UW Medical Center – Roosevelt. “If someone is used to having sex two or three times a week, and now it’s like once a month, that tells me their sex drive is less than it used to be.”
To help you understand just how this hormone affects your partner’s health (spoiler alert: it’s not just about sex), Amory explains what it means to have low testosterone and how your man can get his mojo back.
What is testosterone?
Testosterone is the most important male sex hormone.
That’s because it not only fuels a man’s development and physical appearance, giving him things like body and facial hair, it also results in sperm production and the ability for him to have kids.
Starting in puberty, a man’s testicles begin secreting testosterone. His levels of the hormone typically peak when he’s between 15 and 30 years of age and then naturally begin declining about 1% to 2% every year.
What role does testosterone play in men’s health?
Although it’s most known for fueling your fella’s frisky side, testosterone also plays an important part in maintaining his overall health and well-being.
“Testosterone is necessary to maintain muscle mass and bone density,” Amory says. “We know this because men who lose their testicles to cancer or who have prostate cancer and are put on medications to stop testosterone production get osteoporosis and weak muscles. And if a body builder were to take a lot of testosterone, they would get really big muscles.”
Along with keeping his bones and muscles healthy, testosterone also plays a role in regulating fat distribution and red blood cell production.
What are the signs of low testosterone?
Your partner doesn’t need to look like a body builder to show he has a normal amount of testosterone. Although low testosterone — also called low T — is strongly related to age, men of all sizes and ages can have it.
Some of the most common signs and symptoms to look out for are a decrease in his sex drive, erectile dysfunction, low energy, weak bones and decreased muscle strength. That said, a lot of these symptoms are associated with other health issues.
“Most of the men I see who tell me they have problems — they’re tired all the time, they have nonspecific symptoms, they lost their sex drive — end up having normal testosterone,” Amory says. “Only about 3% to 4% of men will have low testosterone.”
How can you find out if a man’s testosterone is too low?
Let’s say you and your partner haven’t gotten busy in a while, and he’s showing other symptoms of low T. What should you do now?
If he’s concerned, encourage him to talk to his doctor to see if his testosterone levels are to blame. Based on his symptoms and health condition, his doctor may suggest a blood test.
“We do a blood test early in the morning, when testosterone levels are high,” Amory says. “Then, if the first sample shows a low value, we’ll repeat the test another day to make sure the levels are actually low.”
How do you fix low testosterone?
The exact treatment options for your man will depend on the suspected cause of his low testosterone. For example, if there’s an underlying health condition to blame, such as a problem with the pituitary gland, treating the root cause will generally solve the problem.
Using opioids, being overweight and exercising way too much are all known to interfere with testosterone production, so making a plan to taper off medications, lose weight or cut back on physical activity is often the first step.
If that doesn’t work, or if another issue is to blame, his doctor may suggest long-term testosterone therapy. There are a few options from which he can choose, all dependent on his personal preferences.
One common therapy is testosterone shots, given every one to two weeks into a muscle. These can be painful, however, Amory notes. Gels or patches that he can apply directly onto his skin are other options, as are daily testosterone pills, which were approved by the Food and Drug Administration last year.
While testosterone therapy can be helpful for those who truly have low testosterone and are bothered by its symptoms, Amory notes that it’s not a wonder treatment that will cure everything that ails men.
“For the right patient, someone who is bothered by his symptoms, testosterone therapy is a good treatment,” he says. “That said, it’s not a panacea. Testosterone therapy is not going to cure symptoms of fatigue and other things that we all experience in the middle of our lives that are not due to a low testosterone.”How Long Does TRT Take to Work?
TRT is an ongoing treatment that replenishes Testosterone levels to relieve low T symptoms.
Symptoms of low Testosterone include:
- Sexual dysfunction, including erectile dysfunction (ED) in men and low libido in women
- Fatigue and insomnia
- Weight gain and difficulty building muscle
- Changes in overall body composition
- Mood swings, anxiety, and depression
For many patients, TRT is successful in relieving these symptoms. But how long does TRT take to have an effect?
Some results occur within a week to a month, while other results take 3-6 months or longer to begin showing. We’ll go over in detail how long it takes Testosterone Replacement Therapy (TRT) to work.
Sexual Dysfunction and TRT
Sexual dysfunction is one of the main reasons patients seek TRT.
For men, sexual desire usually improves 3-6 weeks after beginning a TRT protocol. That means men feel more desire and are interested in engaging in intimacy more often.
For erectile dysfunction and premature ejaculation, symptom relief typically happens gradually over the course of six months. Defy Medical offers access to common ED medications for TRT patients in the meantime.
Women often experience a similar timeline, with sex drive improving over the course of six months from the start of treatment.
It’s rare for a female Hormone Replacement Therapy protocol to include Testosterone on its own. Most female patients also take Progesterone and Estrogen, which contributes to the libido-boosting effects.
TRT and Changes in Body Composition
Patients often begin feeling more energy and drive after a few weeks on TRT, which can help them commit to regular exercise. The actual effect of Testosterone on fat burning, muscle building, and weight loss takes place over time.
Testosterone’s effect on fat tends to show itself at 4 weeks, reaching maximum improvement at around 6 months to a year. This is typically the timeline for weight loss as well, if patients combine their TRT plan with a healthy diet and exercise.
Changes in muscle and lean body mass typically take place within three to four months of beginning a TRT protocol. Studies also showed an increase in muscle power in men on TRT within six months.
Patients tend to see improvement in their blood sugar and insulin sensitivity in 3-12 months, as well. This impacts fat-burning and how fat is stored in the body.
TRT and Mood
TRT shows benefit in steadying moods and easing hormone-related depression and anxiety. Patients typically feel an improvement in quality of life and outlook within 3 weeks to one month.
Effects on hormone-related depression take around 3-6 weeks after the start of a TRT protocol, and may continue improving for as long as four to seven months after beginning treatment.
Many patients report feeling calmer, more in control of their moods, and happier on a TRT protocol.
Symptoms Improvement and TRT Dosage
The level of symptom relief depends on the effectiveness of your TRT protocol. If dosages are too low to balance Testosterone levels, symptom improvement may not be as noticeable, or may not happen at all. Inexperienced providers may also prescribe doses too infrequently (one injection every two weeks, for example) which can lead to uncomfortable hormone spikes and falls.
Defy Medical offers in-depth and individualized hormone therapy to ensure your TRT plan works for you. We require comprehensive testing to receive a full picture of your hormone and overall health. Our protocols also include taking doses more often for steadier, more optimized levels.
We also take symptoms into account when building your TRT plan and offer regular follow-up for optimization and adjustment.
Each patient is different, and results vary based on individual response. That’s why Defy Medical offers customized protocols.
TRT Results and Delivery Systems
Symptom improvement is also related to the delivery system you use. Certain systems, like Testosterone injections, allow for faster adjustment of hormones since they’re injected into the bloodstream. This can lead to quicker results.
On the other hand, topical Testosterone needs to be absorbed through the skin over time, which means it can take longer to reach optimized levels. Implantable Testosterone pellets are also absorbed at a different rate, and that can change the timing of symptom improvement.
Each delivery system has benefits and drawbacks depending on your comfort level and lifestyle needs. Learn more about Testosterone delivery systems.
TRT with Defy Medical
Defy Medical has been offering hormone restoration therapies for more than a decade. You can access our care team’s expertise via convenient telemedicine consults, plus order your medications online for a seamless telehealth experience.
Testosterone Replacement Therapy is complicated, and you’ll want an individualized plan that targets your symptoms for optimal results.
Ready to learn more?
Get StartedSource: Saad F, Aversa A, Isidori AM, Zafalon L, Zitzmann M, Gooren L. Onset of effects of testosterone treatment and time span until maximum effects are achieved. Eur J Endocrinol. 2011 Nov;165(5):675-85. doi: 10.1530/EJE-11-0221. Epub 2011 Jul 13. PMID: 21753068; PMCID: PMC3188848.How low testosterone treatment can help – and harm – a man's sex drive and fertility
April 6, 2025
If you listen to sports radio, it seems as if every other ad is pushing a new low testosterone (low-T) treatment: More energy! Bigger muscles! Better sex! All with a simple pill, shot, or gel!
When something sounds too good to be true, it usually is.
Many men and a surprising number of providers don't realize that taking exogenous (synthetic) testosterone or over-the-counter supplements may have harmful side effects if not administered properly. Tinkering with your testosterone levels without direction from a qualified specialist can cause other health issues, such as testicular atrophy, infertility, and an increased risk of prostate cancer.
Understanding low testosterone levels
An estimated 1 in 50 men have low-T and experience symptoms such as lessened energy, decreased libido (sex drive), erectile dysfunction, lack of concentration, or trouble sleeping. Around age 30, a man's testosterone levels may slowly begin to decline. Approximately 35% of men in their 70s have low-T, according to the American Urological Association.
Increasing trends in younger men
But we're beginning to see more men in their 20s with low-T at the UT Southwestern male urology clinic. Sometimes low-T is caused by medical conditions, such as genetic diseases or past chemotherapy or radiation therapy. More often, symptoms can be linked to sedentary lifestyle, poor diet, anxiety, or depression.
Safe and effective low-T treatments
Safe, successful low-T treatments start with personalized conversations.
So, before you call that low-T clinic or click on an outlandish ad for testosterone-boosting supplements, find out what's at stake for your health. There are safer, more cost-effective options to restore youthful energy – and potentially reverse fertility loss from previous testosterone products.
What's a normal testosterone level?
Testosterone is a natural hormone produced primarily in the testicles, and it helps men maintain everything from bone density and body hair to sex drive and sperm production. However, you don't have to hit a certain number or level despite what the constant flow of ads may tell you. What matters is who you are and where you are in your life.
On average, a testosterone level of 300–1,000 nanograms per deciliter (ng/dL) of blood is normal. Hypogonadism – reduced testicular function – generally occurs when the total testosterone is less than 300 ng/dL. However, a healthy level for you depends on your age, lifestyle, and bioavailable testosterone level – the unbound testosterone your body isn't using for daily functions.
Unlike many low-T clinics, we calculate bioavailable testosterone by measuring levels of two proteins, sex hormone binding globulin and albumin, that typically bind to testosterone. It's possible to have a normal total testosterone level and experience low-T symptoms if this balance is off.
Having a normal bioavailable testosterone level tells us your body is making plenty and you likely won't benefit from testosterone replacement therapy. If your bioavailable testosterone level is low, we can discuss options.
Risks of off-the-shelf testosterone therapy
Avoid supplements over the counter. None are regulated or approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA), which means you can't verify what they're made with or whether they're safe, even if they come with a celebrity endorsement. Some testosterone supplements have been shown to cause health conditions such as erectile dysfunction and kidney failure.
Low-T clinics also tend to overtreat, making blanket recommendations around the patient's total testosterone and not their individual health needs.
Your best bet is to see a board-certified urologist with expertise in hypogonadism, or a fertility expert who is experienced in treating male patients. A personal approach can help you avoid a range of complications such as:
Infertility
It is well known that exogenous testosterone can – and often will – cause infertility. Unfortunately, some doctors prescribe testosterone to treat infertility, and inadvertently make the problem worse.
Natural testosterone and sperm production is fueled by two hormones created in the pituitary gland of the brain: luteinizing hormone (LH) and follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH). When a man takes synthetic testosterone, the brain detects the excess and slows or stops production of LH and FSH. That means the body quits producing intratesticular (natural) testosterone, and consequently, production of sperm due to the suppression of LH and FSH. This results in reduced fertility.
Testicular atrophy
Little to no LH and FSH production, means no stimulation of the testicles. If the testicles aren't stimulated by these hormones, they may atrophy, or shrivel up. Testicular atrophy has been associated with long-term use of exogenous testosterone or over-the-counter steroids.
Development of male breasts
In some men, estrogen levels will increase as testosterone levels increase. Men naturally need some estrogen, one of the main sex hormones that women have, in the body for bone health and other body functions. But too much estrogen can cause conditions such as gynecomastia (male breast tissue). Excess estrogen can also cause sleep apnea, edema (swelling), and acne.
Increased risk of prostate cancer
Some patients have come to us from low-T clinics with testosterone levels as high as 3,000. That's unnecessary, and so much chemical modification increases the risk of enlarged prostate or increases the risk of prostate cancer. Even safe and moderate testosterone therapy bears a slightly increased risk.
Missed physical diagnoses
Low-T clinics typically don't screen for serious health conditions that can affect testosterone production. For example, patients may need bloodwork to measure prolactin, a hormone made by the pituitary gland that, in high levels, can be a sign of a pituitary tumor.
To follow a patient on testosterone replacement therapy, the provider should check your prostate-specific antigen (PSA), a natural protein that, in high levels, is associated with prostate cancer risk. You'll also need regular measurements of your hemoglobin (a blood protein) and hematocrit (red blood cells), which help carry oxygen through the body. An imbalance can indicate a serious medical issue, such as cancer, anemia, or kidney disease.
Untreated mental health issues
Often, we find that anxiety or depression – not hormonal imbalances – are the root cause of low-T-like symptoms. Suppressing your emotions can interfere with normal functions, such as focusing at work or maintaining an erection. If you truly have low-T, underlying stressors can make symptoms worse.
Everyone can benefit from an unbiased, listening ear now and then. I've referred many patients to see a therapist whose concerns resolve without testosterone therapy.
Testosterone therapy options
Men who are no longer interested in conceiving may benefit from safe, monitored testosterone replacement therapy. Some patients with genetic issues that cause subfertility, such as Klinefelter's syndrome, may also benefit.
Natural options
- Lose a few pounds: Approximately 30% of obese men have low-T. Since muscle burns more calories than fat, the more muscle you have, the less likely your body is to store excess calories as fat. However, some research suggests that low-T contributes to weight gain – it's a vicious cycle. Start by cutting belly fat, which is good for your heart health and general wellness.
- Eat a healthy diet: For full-body health and hormone balance, consider the Mediterranean diet, which focuses on lean proteins, healthy fats, and plant-based foods. Also enjoy foods that are high in vitamin D, which supports testosterone production, strong bones, and mood. Some of these include eggs, salmon, and mushrooms.
- Rethink online viewing habits: Pornography is readily available online and it can perpetuate skewed expectations for what masculinity and sexual virility should feel like. Your body was not designed to perform sexually for hours on end – what you're seeing on the screen is cinematography, not reality.
Medication options
- Clomiphene citrate pills: The drug Clomid binds to estrogen receptors in the brain that cause a negative feedback on testosterone production. The result is an increase in LH and FSH production. My mentor gave a great analogy for this process. It's like putting an ice pack on a thermostat to trick it into cranking out more heat. Clomid encourages the brain to make more LH and FSH, and therefore make more natural testosterone.
- Injections: The hormone hCG can substitute for LH. Patients typically manage these short- or long-term therapies at home. We typically prefer not to prescribe testosterone injections for men in their late 20s and 30s, as these treatments are more likely to cause infertility. Exceptions would be individuals with a genetic problem that interferes with fertility or men who do not want to conceive.
- Aromatase inhibitor: The drug Anastrozole, more commonly used in breast cancer treatment, blocks the conversion of testosterone to estrogen. We typically prescribe this medication when there is a pertinent need because it can drive the estrogen level too low, resulting in fragile bones.
- Gels: This option offers varying degrees of absorption, and you must allow the gel to dry before getting dressed. Women should not make contact with the gel to avoid increasing their own testosterone levels, which can cause side effects such as unwanted body hair.
- Nasal spray: A new drug, Natesto, allows for at-home dosing of testosterone with less risk of fertility loss. The testosterone absorbs through the lining of the nose, and application takes about 10 seconds per dose, three times a day.
- Patches: Similar to a nicotine patch, this option trickles testosterone into the system through the skin. Patches last about 24 hours and must be placed on an area of the body that is free of hair, oil, or irritation. It also can’t go over a bone or joint that will be disturbed by sitting, sleeping, or moving. You should not "reuse" a spot for at least seven days. Patches are not approved for age-related hypogonadism.
- Testosterone pellets: We can implant testosterone pellets into the fatty tissue above the buttock area. The pellets hold crystalized testosterone, which releases into the body over four to six months.
Recovering fertility after testosterone therapy
Regaining fertility is not guaranteed, but it is possible for some patients depending on their age and duration of testosterone use. The first step is to end any testosterone therapy and get baseline lab tests to know where your levels truly are. Often, we find that the patient's LH production has been suppressed. In those cases, the next task is to increase it. Most patients start with Clomid. If that isn't sufficient, we may consider hCG injections.
In rare cases when neither therapy works, we can consider increasing the FSH level as well with injections of the FSH substitute hMG. This drug is more expensive, and success is not guaranteed.
If you are concerned about low-T symptoms, or if you've tried therapies that didn't work, talk with your primary care doctor or urologist. Feeling better starts with a conversation about your needs, goals, and lifestyle. Personalized care from a board-certified urologist or male fertility expert is the healthiest way to get there.
To visit with a men's reproductive health specialist, call 214-645-8300 or request an appointment online.How to Avoid Hair Loss on TRT
If you’re considering TRT, you may be wondering about the impact of TRT on hair loss.
While TRT doesn’t directly cause hair loss, increased Testosterone can lead to androgenic alopecia if the patient has a genetic sensitivity to the hormone DHT (dihydrotestosterone).
Androgenic alopecia is also known as male-pattern baldness and female-pattern baldness. It’s the most common cause of hair loss in men and women.
We’ll discuss how to avoid hair loss when starting a TRT protocol.
Diagnosing Your Androgenic Alopecia
The first step to avoiding hair loss on TRT is to identify whether you have a genetic sensitivity to DHT. If you don’t, then it’s unlikely that TRT (and a resulting increase in DHT levels) will trigger hair loss.
Testosterone and DHT are interlinked, and when T levels rise, DHT levels typically rise as well.
Male-pattern baldness most often occurs in an M-shaped pattern starting at the forehead. It may also manifest as a slowly widening bald spot on the crown of the head. If you notice either of these patterns in your hair, then it’s possible you have male-patterned baldness.
There are other causes of hair loss, including certain lifestyle habits like smoking, lack of adequate nutrition, and chronic stress. Examine your lifestyle to see if these factors may be impacting your hair.
Because androgenic alopecia is a genetic condition, you can also look at your family line for any signs of hair loss, as well. A common myth is that hair loss is inherited from the mother’s side, but in actuality, both parents can pass down the genes that lead to androgenic alopecia. This condition is polygenic, meaning it comes from multiple genes rather than just one.
It’s useful to work with a knowledgeable provider when diagnosing androgenic alopecia. Defy Medical offers consultations to discuss this topic in detail.
DHT Blood Testing
If you’re experiencing hair loss but aren’t sure it’s androgenic alopecia, or if you don’t have any symptoms but still want to check, you can order a DHT blood test. This test measures your DHT levels to determine whether your levels are elevated. Elevated DHT levels along with hair loss often indicate androgenic alopecia.
How to Avoid Hair Loss on TRT
If you do have androgenic alopecia, there are several treatment options to slow and minimize hair loss.
It’s important to catch hair thinning and hair loss as quickly as possible, so you can preserve hair follicles. It’s much more effective to slow hair loss than to grow hair back after it’s gone.
Finasteride (Propecia)
Finasteride is used either orally or topically to slow the production of DHT. It does this by inhibiting the enzyme 5-alpha-reductase, which converts Testosterone into DHT.
While it’s often successful at slowing hair loss, it can also impact hormone production. This can lead to hypogonadism and other side effects in men, and it’s not recommended for women.
Defy Medical provides products containing Finasteride, but we recommend utilizing topical Finasteride rather than oral medication, since the former does not impact hormones in the same way. We also suggest exploring some of the less severe options below first.
Minoxidil
Minoxidil is a widely available non-prescription treatment for hair thinning. It stimulates the growth of new hair by improving the blood supply to shrinking hair follicles.
When used in the early stages of alopecia, it can be effective as a standalone treatment and is considered safe for most people.
Latanoprost
Latanoprost imitates prostaglandins, which have shown promise in promoting hair follicle growth. In studies, latanoprost increased hair density in young male participants who had minor hair loss.
Like many other hair loss treatments, Latanoprost works best when used as soon as possible after hair loss begins.
Ketoconazole
Despite being primarily an antifungal cream, Ketoconazole has demonstrated potential in mitigating the impacts of dihydrotestosterone (DHT) on the scalp. Evidence suggests that Ketoconazole blocks DHT from shrinking hair follicles.
Spironolactone
Spironolactone’s primary use is to alleviate edema (water retention), but it’s also prescribed to women for female-pattern baldness.
This medication aims to decrease the levels of Testosterone and other androgens produced by the ovaries and adrenal glands, which in turn decreases DHT levels.
Spironolactone can be administered as an oral tablet or topical solution.
Azelaic Acid
Azelaic Acid is a naturally occurring antibiotic that has shown potential in limiting 5-alpha-reductase activity in the skin. This may lead to a decrease in DHT levels, which helps ease androgenic alopecia symptoms.
Browse Hair Loss ProductsPRP Scalp Injections
Platelet-Rich Plasma (PRP) injections are a promising therapy for hair loss. PRP can potentially boost hair growth by delivering healing growth factors directly to hair follicles.
The treatment involves using a sample of your own blood, which is processed to obtain the highest concentration of platelets and growth factors. The PRP mixture is then injected throughout the scalp for a comprehensive treatment.
PRP injections are particularly beneficial for individuals with thinning hair who have not yet experienced bald spots. Defy Medical provides PRP injections as a hair loss solution at our clinic in Tampa, FL.
How to Avoid Hair Loss on TRT
As we’ve explained, TRT may trigger hair loss if you have a genetic sensitivity to DHT. This is the most common cause of hair loss in men and women, and it’s called androgenic alopecia.
Because the symptoms of low Testosterone can be debilitating, many men still pursue TRT treatment even if they experience androgenic alopecia. For those patients, Defy Medical offers access to a wide range of hair loss therapy options.
You can access our comprehensive care through convenient telemedicine consults and online ordering of medications.
Ready to learn more?
Get StartedHow to Get Testosterone Replacement Therapy (TRT) in the UK
Navigating the Best Path for Treatment
Testosterone Deficiency is a recognised medical condition that can significantly impact physical and psychological well-being. For those experiencing symptoms of low testosterone, accessing the right treatment is essential.
In the UK, Testosterone Replacement Therapy (TRT) can be obtained through the NHS or private clinics, but the journey to effective treatment is not always straightforward.
Accessing TRT in the UK
To qualify for TRT in the UK, a patient must have a confirmed medical need and a prescription from a licensed doctor. The threshold for diagnosis varies, but in general, a total testosterone level below 12 nmol/L is considered for assessment. However, the pathway to treatment differs depending on whether you pursue TRT through the NHS or a private provider.
TRT Through the NHS
While the NHS provides TRT in certain cases, the process can be lengthy and restrictive:
1. Initial Consultation:
Most NHS patients must first consult with a general practitioner (GP). If the GP recognises the symptoms and deems them significant, they may order a blood test to assess testosterone levels.
2. Stringent Criteria:
If the GP is aware of the BSSM guidelines, they can prescribe testosterone if levels are 12nmol/l or lower alongside negative symptoms such as low mood, tiredness, brain fog and low libido. Most GPs are not confident in prescribing TRT so defer to an Endocrinologist. The threshold used by the NHS is often lower than that used by many private clinics use. This means many individuals with symptoms of testosterone deficiency but levels above this cut-off are often denied treatment.
3. Referral to an Endocrinologist:
If the patient qualifies, they may be referred to an Endocrinologist, a process that can take months, leaving symptoms untreated and potentially worsening. Endocrinologists tend to utilise their local testosterone pathology reference ranges in defining low testosterone. These ranges have lowered with time, perhaps reflecting a more unhealthy population rather than lowering the quantitative low testosterone number.
4. Limited Treatment Options:
Even when treatment is prescribed, the options available may not be tailored to individual patient needs, potentially leading to fluctuations in hormone levels and suboptimal results.
5. Inconsistent Monitoring:
NHS monitoring protocols may not always align with best practices for TRT optimisation, increasing the risk of side effects and inadequate symptom relief.
For many men, these barriers lead them to seek alternative routes for TRT.
Private TRT in the UK
Private TRT clinics offer a more patient-centered approach, providing:
Specialist Expertise:
Private clinics focus on hormone therapy, ensuring patients receive care from experienced professionals.
Comprehensive Assessment:
A thorough evaluation, including an in-depth medical history, symptom review, and detailed blood tests, ensures a tailored approach.
Personalised Treatment Plans:
Private TRT is adapted to the individual, taking into account lifestyle preferences, symptom severity, and response to treatment.
Continuous Monitoring and Support:
Regular follow-ups and adjustments ensure optimal effectiveness whilst minimising side effects.
Faster Access:
Shorter waiting times mean patients receive treatment promptly, rather than enduring long NHS delays.
The Dangers of Unregulated TRT
While some may consider self-prescribed TRT or online sources, this is highly discouraged. Obtaining testosterone without a valid prescription is illegal in the UK and carries serious health risks, including cardiovascular complications, hormone imbalances, and liver toxicity. Proper medical supervision is essential to ensure safe and effective treatment.
Choosing the Best TRT Clinic in the UK
Selecting a reputable TRT provider is crucial. A high-quality clinic should offer:
Experienced and qualified medical professionals
Care Quality Commission (CQC) registration
A thorough diagnostic process
A treatment option that best meets the needs of the individual
Continued access to medication to ensure safe practice
Regular monitoring and follow-up care
Transparent communication and patient education
Transparent communication and patient education
A clinic’s leadership can also be a key indicator of quality. The Men’s Health Clinic is led by experienced medical professionals with a passion for optimising men’s health. Our CQC regulated clinic follows best practices in hormone therapy, ensuring patient safety, efficacy, and long-term well-being.
Conclusion
For men seeking TRT in the UK, navigating the available options can be complex. The Men’s Health Clinic aims to simplify your journey through microdosing TRT and providing patients with the necessary level of support and guidance to ensure patients can concentrate on the four pillars of hormonal health, lifestyle, nutrition, exercise and mindset.
While NHS treatment is available, the restrictive eligibility criteria and long wait times often make private care a more viable solution. Private TRT clinics offer specialist expertise, personalised treatment plans, and ongoing support, ensuring patients receive the best possible care. When selecting a clinic, prioritising experience, regulatory compliance, and patient-focused care will ensure the safest and most effective treatment journey.How to Know if You Have Low Testosterone
Feeling Off but Not Sure Why?
If you’re experiencing fatigue, low libido, or trouble concentrating, you might be dealing with more than just a stressful week.
These could be signs of low Testosterone, a common but often overlooked condition in men’s health—and sometimes even in women.
At Defy Medical, we specialize in identifying and treating hormone imbalances to help you feel like yourself again.
So, how do you know if low Testosterone is the issue? Let’s break it down.
What Is Testosterone and Why Does It Matter?
Testosterone is the primary sex hormone in men and plays a key role in maintaining muscle mass, bone density, red blood cell production, mood, energy, and sexual health.
In women, Testosterone is also present in smaller amounts and contributes to overall hormone balance, libido, and mood.
Testosterone levels naturally decline with age, typically around 1% per year after age 30. This can lead to symptoms that impact your quality of life.
What Are the Most Common Symptoms of Low Testosterone?
Testosterone deficiency does not always appear in obvious ways. Symptoms can be subtle at first and build gradually over time. Here are some of the most common indicators:
- Decreased libido or sexual performance issues
- Fatigue or low energy, even after rest
- Mood swings, depression, or irritability
- Loss of muscle mass or increased body fat
- Trouble focusing or forgetfulness (often called “brain fog”)
- Sleep disturbances or poor recovery
- Reduced motivation or drive
If you’re noticing a combination of these, it’s worth taking a closer look at your hormone health.
How Is Low Testosterone Diagnosed?
The only way to definitively know if you have low Testosterone is through comprehensive lab testing. At Defy Medical, we look at more than total Testosterone. We also examine:
- Free Testosterone – the bioavailable form your body can actually use
- Estradiol (E2) – important for hormone balance, especially during treatment
- DHEA – which is a precursor hormone to Testosterone
- Thyroid Panel – including Free T3/T4 and TSH, which often interact with Testosterone
- Complete Blood Count (CBC) and Metabolic Panel – to check for underlying conditions that may cause similar symptoms to low T
- Luteinizing Hormone and Prostate Specific Antigen – to monitor overall reproductive health and check for prostate issues
We recommend getting tested in the morning when Testosterone levels are naturally at their highest.
What Causes Low Testosterone?
Testosterone deficiency can result from a variety of internal and external factors—and often, it’s not just one cause, but a combination. That’s why it’s important to look at the full picture.
Some of the most common causes of low Testosterone include:
Natural aging —While this is a normal part of aging, symptoms can lead to a drop in your quality of life.
Chronic stress and elevated cortisol — Elevated cortisol can suppress Testosterone production and throw off your overall hormone balance, especially if stress becomes a daily norm.
Poor sleep or sleep apnea — Testosterone is mainly made during deep sleep, so good rest is important for hormone health.
Injury or trauma to the testicles — The testicles make Testosterone. Physical trauma, surgery, or past infections like mumps can harm them.
Obesity or insulin resistance — Excess fat tissue can convert Testosterone into Estrogen, further contributing to hormonal imbalance.
Excess alcohol consumption – Excessive alcohol use and recreational drug use can negatively affect hormone levels and testicular function.
In many cases, multiple factors play a role, which is why working with a knowledgeable provider is key.
Can Stress or Lifestyle Really Impact Testosterone?
Chronic stress raises cortisol, a hormone that directly competes with Testosterone. Over time, elevated cortisol can suppress Testosterone production and increase symptoms like fatigue, irritability, and belly fat.
Inadequate sleep, nutrient deficiencies, or lack of exercise can also disrupt your hormonal balance. That’s why Defy Medical takes a full-picture approach, we look at your lifestyle, diet, sleep, stress levels, and more.
Should You Get Tested Even if You’re Young?
Low Testosterone isn’t just an “older man’s problem.” We’re seeing more men in their 20s and 30s with hormonal imbalances—potentially due to modern stressors, environmental toxins, or past steroid use.
If you’re under 40 and experiencing symptoms, getting tested can give you answers—and peace of mind.
What Happens If Low Testosterone Is Left Untreated?
When Testosterone remains low over time, the effects can go beyond fatigue or sexual issues. Long-term Testosterone deficiency has been linked to:
- Increased risk of cardiovascular disease
- Loss of bone density (osteoporosis)
- Worsening insulin resistance
- Mental health struggles like depression and anxiety
Early detection and treatment can help prevent these complications and restore your health trajectory.
What Are the Treatment Options for Low Testosterone?
If your lab results confirm a Testosterone deficiency, our expert care team will guide you through treatment options tailored to your goals and health status. These may include:
- Testosterone Replacement Therapy (TRT) – Delivered via injection, topical cream, or subcutaneous pellet
- Lifestyle Coaching – Addressing sleep, diet, exercise, and stress
- Supplementation – With nutrients like DHEA, zinc, or Vitamin D if needed
- Monitoring and Adjustments – Ongoing lab work to fine-tune your plan and keep you feeling your best
At Defy Medical, we don’t believe in a one-size-fits-all approach. Our protocols are designed around your unique lab results and symptoms.
How Can You Get Started with Testing?
Getting started is simple. We offer convenient telemedicine appointments and access to nationwide lab testing. Through our partnership with laboratories like LabCorp and Quest, patients can order comprehensive labs and have them performed at a lab near them.
Once your results are in, you’ll meet with one of our experienced providers to go over your results and discuss treatment options, including Testosterone Replacement Therapy if appropriate.
When Should You Talk to a Provider About Low Testosterone?
If your symptoms are impacting your daily life, or if you just don’t feel like yourself anymore, it’s time to take action. Testosterone deficiency is treatable, and the earlier you address it, the better your long-term outcome.
At Defy Medical, our goal is to help you regain your vitality through science-backed, individualized care. We’ve helped thousands of patients feel better, think clearer, and live more fully, and we can help you, too.
Ready to take the first step?
Get StartedHow to Manage Polycythemia Caused by TRT
Polycythemia is a Potential Side Effect of TRT
While patients on a Testosterone Replacement Therapy (TRT) protocol typically report symptom relief and improved quality of life, there are also potential side effects.
One is that TRT can sometimes cause a blood-building effect, which means the body produces more red blood cells. This can be a good thing for those with mild anemia. But for those without anemia, it can cause the blood to become viscous or “sticky,” making it harder for the heart to pump. This condition is called polycythemia.
Polycythemia can lead to high blood pressure and, in certain scenarios, an increased risk of stroke and heart attack.
This condition does not affect every TRT patient, but it’s important to be aware of it, and to engage in regular monitoring and preventative care to avoid any complications.
If you’re on a TRT protocol, you doctor should closely monitor your hemoglobin and hematocrit levels via periodic bloodwork to catch any signs of polycythemia. If your levels indicate this condition, there are ways to manage polycythemia caused by TRT.
Why Does TRT Sometimes Cause Polycythemia?
In addition to regulating body composition and sex drive, Testosterone can increase the body’s production of red blood cells (RBC). When you raise your Testosterone levels, you may also increase your RBC count.
Although all Testosterone delivery systems can increase the amount of red blood cells, studies show a higher incidence of polycythemia in those using intramuscular Testosterone injections compared to topical Testosterone.
Smoking has also been associated with polycythemia and may contribute to this condition. If you’re a smoker and you’re on TRT, consider a smoking cessation program.
How to Identify Polycythemia
The first step in preventing and addressing polycythemia is to work with a provider who regularly tests your hemoglobin and hematocrit. These two factors are the best indication of increased red blood cell production.
Hemoglobin is a protein on red blood cells that is responsible for transporting oxygen to the tissues and organs throughout the body, and for carrying carbon dioxide back to the lungs. Average hemoglobin ranges are 13.5 to 17.5 grams per deciliter for adult men, and 12 to 15.5 grams per deciliter for adult women.
Hematocrit measures the proportion of red blood cells compared to total blood volume. A hematocrit test is sometimes called a packed-cell volume (PCV) test. You find the percentage of hematocrit by comparing the measurement of the packed red blood cells versus the entire blood column. Ideal hematocrit ranges vary based on factors like gender and race, but the average range for adult men is 41%-50%, while the average range for adult women is 36%-44%.
Any hematocrit result above the recommended range should be evaluated, especially results over 52%.
When to Test for Polycythemia
Typically, you should test your hemoglobin and hematocrit before starting TRT to establish a baseline. Then, you and your provider should test again three months after beginning your TRT protocol.
After that, many established TRT patients move to checking hemoglobin and hematocrit every six months. (Patient protocols may vary based on individual responses, and you should always follow your provider’s guidance).
Should I Stop TRT if I Have a High Red Blood Cell Count?
For many patients, stopping their TRT protocol isn’t the best option.
Patients typically start TRT to address life-derailing symptoms of Testosterone imbalance, including low sex drive, sexual dysfunction, lack of energy and fatigue, fat gain, and more. Without TRT, these unwanted symptoms often return.
You may also wonder if you should switch from injections to topical Testosterone, since the latter seems to have less effect on hematocrit. Many patients don’t like this option, either, because their injection protocol is effective at reducing their hormone imbalance symptoms.
So, what can you do to address polycythemia caused by TRT? Read on to find out more.
Therapeutic Phlebotomy for Polycythemia
Therapeutic phlebotomy is similar to donating blood, but this procedure is prescribed by physicians as a way to bring down blood hematocrit and viscosity. Removing one pint of blood generally lowers hematocrit by around 3% (results vary by patient).
Depending on your unique circumstances, your provider may recommend regular therapeutic phlebotomy every 8-12 weeks.
The procedure is simple and performed in the same manner as a blood donation. Successful therapeutic phlebotomy typically decreases hematocrit, hemoglobin, and blood iron in less than one hour.
Is therapeutic phlebotomy covered by insurance?
Unfortunately, it can be difficult to qualify for reimbursement, or to get therapeutic phlebotomy covered by insurance.
Some physicians may write a letter of medical necessity, which the patient can take to their insurance company to justify the procedure. The CPT reimbursement codes for therapeutic phlebotomy are CPT 39107, icd9 code 289.0.
(Note: Defy Medical is a concierge clinic and does not process or accept insurance, or contact insurance companies. Patients can speak with their insurance carrier directly to see if any procedures or therapies are eligible for reimbursement.)
Therapeutic Phlebotomy at the Defy Medical Tampa Clinic
Defy Medical offers therapeutic phlebotomy (when appropriate) at our local clinic in Tampa, FL. Receive your therapeutic phlebotomy in a relaxing environment with providers you already know and trust. See the Tampa clinic.
Another Option to Treat Polycythemia: Donating Blood
Healthy patients who are eligible to donate blood can take this route. Since the process is very similar to therapeutic phlebotomy, it typically has the same effect.
Eligibility requirements for donating blood usually include:
- Being in good health without conditions like common colds, HIV, Hepatitis, and other illnesses or infections.
- Avoiding travel outside of the country to areas with high Malaria risk.
- Having adequate iron levels, without anemia.
- Other requirements depending on the organization collecting blood.
Whole blood donors can typically donate every eight weeks, or up to six times per year.
How Often Should I Donate Blood or Receive Therapeutic Phlebotomy?
The frequency of the phlebotomy depends on individual factors, and your provider should work with you to develop a customized plan.
In general, a blood draw every two to three months is typically recommended for TRT patients experiencing polycythemia. It’s important not to overdraw blood, because doing so can lead to anemia, iron deficiency, and other conditions.
You and your provider should continue measuring your hematocrit and hemoglobin after beginning therapeutic phlebotomy. Your tests results help identify whether the treatment is sufficient.
Regular testing can also let you know if your red blood cell production stabilizes. Sometimes RBC production can normalize without any specific cause.
Who is Most Likely to Experience Polycythemia as a TRT Side Effect?
It’s impossible to predict exactly who will be prone to developing polycythemia. However, these factors may play a role:
- Higher Testosterone doses in your TRT protocol
- An elevated body fat percentage
- Advanced age
- Behavioral factors like smoking
People with elevated red blood cell production may have symptoms including:
- High blood pressure and an increase in headaches
- Becoming red-faced and flushed during exercise or exertion
- Fatigue, lack of energy, and dizziness
- Shortness of breath when lying down
Just as often, patients with polycythemia show NO symptoms. That’s why careful testing over time is the best way to diagnose and treat this condition.
Are There Other Causes of Polycythemia Besides TRT?
There are different types of polycythemia, which can be caused by different things.
Primary polycythemia occurs because of a genetic mutation inside the bone marrow, which causes it to overproduce red blood cells.
Secondary polycythemia can be caused by:
- Smoking
- Sleep apnea or a breathing obstruction
- Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease (COPD)
- Lung disease
- Heart or cardiovascular disease
- Certain cancers and/or endocrine tumors
- Performance enhancing drugs
Your risk of developing polycythemia may increase if you have any of these conditions and also begin Testosterone Replacement Therapy.
Are There Other Treatments for Polycythemia?
For general heart health and to help prevent heart attacks, some doctors may recommend daily aspirin and/or omega-3 fatty acids (fish oil capsules).
These can be an important part of a heart health regimen, but they are not typically alternatives for therapeutic phlebotomy if you have polycythemia and want to continue TRT.
There are prescription medications that slow the production of red blood cells directly, but patients often prefer trying therapeutic phlebotomy first. The latter has a good safety profile and has been shown to be effective for many patients.
Expertly Guided TRT with Defy Medical
To identify and manage polycythemia, work with an experienced provider who monitors your hematocrit and hemoglobin levels and recommends treatment based on the results. This is why individualized care with regular follow-up is so important for a successful TRT protocol.
With Defy Medical, you access telemedicine consultations with Men’s Health experts who can provide on-going guidance. You also access online ordering and doorstep delivery of medications, and a Patient Care team accessible by phone and email who can answer questions and guide you through your protocol.
Ready to learn more about polycythemia and TRT, or consult with an expert about how to manage it?
* denotes a required field.As men get older, their levels of testosterone, the male hormone, tend to decline. Low testosterone, also called hypogonadism, can cause you to feel tired and weak and can also lower your sex drive. Thankfully, it’s often treatable.
Never Miss a Beat!
Subscribe to Our HealthBeat Newsletter!
Thank you for subscribing!
You can now select the specific newsletters you'd like to receive.
You are already subscribed.
Subscribe to more newsletters in our email preference center.
Sorry, an error occurred. Please try again later.
Get Healthy Tips Sent to Your Phone!
The Importance of Testosterone
MedlinePlus explains that testosterone is essential to:
- Regulate hair growth and fat location on the body
- Strengthen bones and muscles
- Produce sperm
- Maintain sex drive and erections
- Boost energy and mood
- Develop male physical traits
Causes of Low Testosterone
It’s normal for your testosterone levels to decrease as you age, but the following are also risk factors for low testosterone:
- Injury to the testicles
- Surgery or radiation treatment in the groin area
- Problems with thyroid function
- Certain medicines
- Chronic health conditions, such as kidney or liver disease
- Obesity
- Issues with the pituitary gland or the hypothalamus
How to Treat Low Testosterone
If you have low testosterone, you may experience a lower sex drive, problems with erections, loss of strength, insomnia, sleep apnea, and/or depression. It’s also possible to have no symptoms.
Your doctor can conduct tests to confirm whether you have low testosterone and to determine the cause. The most common treatment is testosterone replacement therapy, a medicine that contains artificial testosterone and is delivered through a patch, injection, gel, or implant. Depending on the cause, however, in very specific conditions your doctor may instead prescribe medicine in pill form that promotes testosterone production.
Side effects of testosterone replacement may include trouble urinating, acne, infertility, increasing the numbers of red blood cells, enlarging your prostate, and sore or enlarged breasts. Experts aren’t sure whether testosterone replacement lowers or increases the risk of heart attack, stroke, or blood clots.
To learn more about how to treat low testosterone, visit the UPMC Men’s Health Center or call 1-877-641-4636(4MEN) to make an appointment with an expert.
Sources
MedlinePlus, Could you have low testosterone? https://medlineplus.gov/ency/patientinstructions/000722.htm
UPMC, Low Testosterone, https://www.upmc.com/health-library/article?hwid=abo6506&locale=en-us
About Men’s Health Center
The UPMC Men’s Health Center evaluates and treats conditions affecting men’s sexual and reproductive health. With years of clinical experience in male sexual medicine and surgery, our team has treated a wide variety of conditions and performed thousands of surgeries. We are dedicated to providing patients the highest level of quality care. Our providers understand the intimate nature of male sexual difficulties, and we will work to help you restore your normal level of sexual function in a comfortable, educational, and discreet environment.Testosterone is more than just a sex hormone. We tend to associate testosterone with sexual performance or being buff. But did you know that lacking testosterone can become debilitating? This article provides an in-depth discussion on the steep price of living with testosterone deficiency.
What is Hypogonadism?
Hypogonadism, also called testosterone deficiency, occurs when a man’s blood testosterone falls below 300 ng/dL, which is the normal level, due to irregularities with either the testicles or the hypothalamic-pituitary axis. In males, testosterone is secreted from the testicles or testes by the Leydig cells. The Leydig cells are stimulated by the luteinising hormone produced by the pituitary gland, which is triggered by the gonadotropin-releasing hormone from the hypothalamus.
Types of Testosterone Deficiency
Hypogonadism has two types, which are determined by where the issue of your lack of testosterone lies:
- Primary Hypogonadism – also called hypergonadotropic hypogonadism, this is diagnosed when your testosterone deficiency is caused by an abnormality in the testes. This can also be your diagnosis even if you reach the passing mark for a healthy testosterone range if the level of your luteinising hormone is excessive. This is because your pituitary gland is often trying to compensate for the lack of testosterone by releasing more hormones.
- Secondary Hypogonadism – also called hypogonadotropic hypogonadism, this condition happens when your testosterone deficiency is caused by a lack of luteinising hormone or gonadotropin-releasing hormone. Remember, your endocrine system needs to signal your body to start biological processes. Your testes may be capable of producing enough testosterone, but if there’s nothing ordering them to, you’ll still be dealing with low testosterone.
Both primary and secondary hypogonadism can be caused by genetic conditions that damage your testes, hypothalamus, or pituitary gland. It can also be due to inflammation caused by an infection, collateral damage from chemotherapy, injury, or another chronic disease. Kidney failure, liver scarring, diabetes, alcohol addiction, and obesity contribute to both secondary hypogonadism and sexual dysfunctions.
Consequences of Having Low Testosterone
The effects of low testosterone coincide with symptoms of other conditions like hypothyroidism and mood disorders, which is why it’s important to get tested. It becomes even more imperative if you display many of these:
Muscular Atrophy
Muscular atrophy is the term for when you’re losing muscle mass. Most men don’t notice that their shrinking muscles are not just because of their lack of exercise, but that it’s mainly caused by low testosterone secretion. Testosterone deficiency can also lead to fatigue and loss of motivation, so one can become more sedentary. Note that testosterone is responsible for muscular and skeletal growth.
Testicular Atrophy
Your muscles aren’t the only thing that can be reduced by a lack of testosterone. Your testicles themselves can also shrink. Testicular atrophy and testosterone deficiency have a bidirectional relationship, which means they affect each other. Hypogonadism can be triggered by testicular atrophy caused by a sexually transmitted disease like HIV/AIDS.
Erectile Dysfunction
Testosterone triggers the penile tissues to release nitric oxide. Nitric oxide is necessary for your penile vessels to relax and dilate so that blood can enter for an erection. If your blood vessels remain constricted, you inevitably experience a weakened erection. Studies show a strong link between low testosterone and erectile dysfunction.
Low Libido
Another sexual problem you might encounter due to low testosterone is a lack of sexual desire. Sex drive is often spearheaded by increased circulating testosterone. Some attribute morning wood to your testosterone being at its peak in the morning. Of course, the fatigue and mood swings that result from testosterone deficiency also make it harder to be in the mood for sex.
Infertility
Testosterone is crucial for sperm production. Not having enough testosterone often leads to oligospermia (low sperm count) or azoospermia (zero sperm count). Additionally, the pituitary gland releases follicle-stimulating hormone, alongside luteinising hormone, to signal sperm production. Oligospermia can make it difficult for couples to conceive because there aren’t enough sperm cells to try and penetrate an egg cell.
Hair Loss
Balding or a receding hairline aside, do you notice that you simply don’t have much hair in the armpit and pubic area? That’s a big sign of low testosterone. Note that testosterone is responsible for the development of male characteristics, which is why men tend to have a beard or hairy limbs. Males also lose testosterone as they age, which is why balding is common among older men.
Gynecomastia
If you barely have any testosterone, chances are your oestrogen levels are high. Luteinising hormone, which triggers the release of testosterone, balances oestrogen levels in men. Just as testosterone affects the size of your penis, oestrogen affects the size of your breasts. If you have too much oestrogen, your breasts may become enlarged.
Anaemia
A lesser-known function of testosterone is its role in red blood cell production. Not only does testosterone help stimulate the production of your erythrocytes, another term for red blood cells, but it also keeps your iron levels sufficient and contributes to the survival of your red blood cells. Research shows a correlation between anaemia and testosterone deficiency.
Fatigue
Anaemia aside, a lack of testosterone can result in exhaustion, which may also be why men with testosterone deficiency often have trouble concentrating. Testosterone is necessary for male metabolism and strength. If there’s less testosterone, your body may become more inefficient with its processes, causing greater energy consumption and a resulting feeling of tiredness.
Depression
Some studies show a relationship between testosterone and depression through serotonin. Serotonin is a neurotransmitter that’s more commonly known as the happy hormone. Lacking serotonin is linked to depression, which is why selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) are one of the treatment options for depression. Serotonin is also necessary for ejaculatory control. This may be why some men with hypogonadism also experience premature ejaculation.
What To Do If You Suspect You Have Hypogonadism
If you’re experiencing most of the negative impacts of testosterone deficiency listed above, here are the steps you should take:
- Test your testosterone levels – talk to your doctor about your symptoms. They will refer you for a total testosterone level blood test. If the test results confirm low testosterone, they will most likely refer you for testosterone replacement therapy (TRT).
- Check for dietary deficiency – sometimes, dietary deficiencies like a lack of vitamin D and zinc can result in some of the symptoms. If you’ve tested for both testosterone deficiency and hypothyroidism yet the results show as normal, check for these.
- Avoid stress at all costs – cortisol, the stress hormone, throttles your testosterone production. It’s also a risk factor for sexual dysfunctions and chronic diseases. Try to use stress management activities like meditation, yoga, and breathing exercises.
- Don’t compromise sleep – if you’re frequently sleep deprived, you may end up with low testosterone. This is because sleep is crucial for regulating testosterone and cortisol. Not having enough sleep can spike your cortisol levels, which will hinder testosterone release.
- Try resistance training – resistance training has been shown to be one of the exercises that stimulate testosterone the most. Note that if your testes, hypothalamus, or pituitary gland is damaged, you may still have low testosterone, but exercise will keep you healthy.
- Eat the right food – you should aim for a balanced diet of vegetables, fruits, meat, and seafood. Avoid products that have been heavily processed, like crisps, canned instant food, and takeaways. You may also want to incorporate more testosterone-enhancing foods into your meals while reducing sugar consumption.
- Reduce alcohol intake – low to moderate alcohol consumption may not pose as much risk to your testosterone levels. However, long-term heavy consumption of alcohol will lower your testosterone. Alcohol may also trigger erectile dysfunction.
- Get into TRT – TRT is the main treatment for hypogonadism. It can come in the form of gels, patches, injectables, pellets, and pills. However, some conditions that trigger low testosterone, like obesity, may be treatable without TRT.
Conclusion
Not only can low testosterone wreak havoc on your intimacy, but it also takes a significant toll on your quality of life. So, if you think you may have hypogonadism, please get checked ASAP. And if you’re also suffering from ED or PE, our team of experts will gladly step in to help. Book an appointment with us to begin regaining your sexual wellness!Hypogonadism occurs when the body's sex glands (gonads) produce little or no hormones. In men, these glands are the testes. In women, these glands are the ovaries.
Causes
The cause of hypogonadism can be primary (testes or ovaries) or secondary (problem with the pituitary or hypothalamus). In primary hypogonadism, the ovaries or testes themselves do not function properly. Causes of primary hypogonadism include:
- Certain autoimmune disorders
- Genetic and developmental disorders
- Infection
- Iron excess (hemochromatosis)
- Liver and kidney disease
- Radiation (to the gonads)
- Surgery
- Trauma
The most common genetic disorders that cause primary hypogonadism are Turner syndrome (in women) and Klinefelter syndrome (in men).
If you already have other autoimmune disorders you may be at higher risk for autoimmune damage to the gonads. These can include disorders that affect the liver, adrenal glands, and thyroid glands, as well as type 1 diabetes.
In central hypogonadism, the centers in the brain that control the gonads (hypothalamus and pituitary) do not function properly. Causes of central hypogonadism include:
- Anorexia nervosa
- Bleeding in the area of the pituitary
- Taking medicines, such as glucocorticoids and opiates
- Stopping anabolic steroids
- Genetic problems
- Infections
- Nutritional deficiencies
- Iron excess (hemochromatosis)
- Radiation (to the pituitary or hypothalamus)
- Rapid, significant weight loss (including weight loss after bariatric surgery)
- Surgery (skull base surgery near the pituitary)
- Trauma
- Tumors
A genetic cause of central hypogonadism is Kallmann syndrome. Many people with this condition also have a decreased sense of smell.
Menopause is the most common reason for hypogonadism. It is normal in all women and occurs on average around age 50. Testosterone levels decrease in men as they age, as well. The range of normal testosterone in the blood is much lower in a 50 to 60 year-old man than it is in a 20 to 30 year-old man.
Symptoms
Girls who have hypogonadism will not begin menstruating. Hypogonadism can affect their breast development and height. If hypogonadism occurs after puberty, symptoms in women include:
- Hot flashes
- Energy and mood changes
- Menstruation becomes irregular or stops
In boys, hypogonadism affects muscle, beard, genital and voice development. It also leads to growth problems. In men the symptoms are:
- Breast enlargement
- Muscle loss
- Decreased interest in sex (low libido)
If a pituitary or other brain tumor is present (central hypogonadism), there may be:
- Headaches or vision loss
- Milky breast discharge (from a prolactinoma, a tumor that produces the hormone prolactin)
- Symptoms of other hormone deficiencies (such as hypothyroidism)
The most common tumors affecting the pituitary are craniopharyngioma in children and prolactinoma adenomas in adults.
Exams and Tests
You may need to have tests to check:
- Estrogen level (women)
- Follicle stimulating hormone (FSH level) and luteinizing hormone (LH) level
- Testosterone level (men) - interpretation of this test in older men and men who are obese can be difficult so results should be discussed with a hormone specialist (endocrinologist)
- Other measures of pituitary function
Other tests may include:
- Blood tests for anemia and iron level
- Genetic tests including a karyotype to check chromosomal number and structure
- Prolactin level (milk hormone)
- Sperm count
- Thyroid tests
Sometimes imaging tests are needed, such as a sonogram of the ovaries. If pituitary disease is suspected, an MRI or CT scan of the brain may be done.
Treatment
You may need to take hormone-based medicines. Estrogen and progesterone are used for girls and women. The medicines come in the form of a pill or skin patch. Testosterone is used for boys and men. The medicine can be given as a skin patch, skin gel, a solution applied to the armpit, a patch applied to the upper gum, or by injection.
Menopausal symptoms may be treated with estrogen alone (if the woman does not have a uterus) or estrogen and progesterone for a woman who still has a uterus. This is called combination hormone therapy.
In some women, injections or pills can be used to stimulate ovulation. Injections of pituitary hormone may be used to help men produce sperm. Other people may need surgery and radiation therapy if there is a pituitary or hypothalamic cause of the disorder.
Outlook (Prognosis)
Many forms of hypogonadism are treatable and have a good outlook.
Possible Complications
In women, hypogonadism may cause infertility. Menopause is a form of hypogonadism that occurs naturally. It can cause hot flashes, vaginal dryness, and irritability as estrogen levels fall. The risk for osteoporosis and heart disease increase after menopause.
Some women with hypogonadism take estrogen therapy, most often those who have early menopause. But long-term use of hormone therapy may increase the risk for breast cancer, blood clots and heart disease (especially in older women). Women should talk with their health care provider about the risks and benefits of menopausal hormone therapy.
In men, hypogonadism results in the loss of sex drive and may cause:
- Impotence
- Infertility
- Osteoporosis
- Weakness
Men normally have lower testosterone as they age. However, the decline in hormone levels is much less than in women.
When to Contact a Medical Professional
Contact your provider if you notice:
- Breast discharge
- Breast enlargement (men)
- Hot flashes (women)
- Impotence
- Loss of body hair
- Loss of menstrual period
- Problems getting pregnant
- Problems with your sex drive
- Weakness
Both men and women should contact their provider if they have headaches or vision problems.
Prevention
Maintaining fitness, normal body weight and healthy eating habits may help in some cases. Other causes may not be preventable.
Alternative Names
Gonadal deficiency; Testicular failure; Ovarian failure; Testosterone - hypogonadism
Images
References
Aleksic S, Bartke A, Lamberts SWJ, Milman S. Endocrine function and aging. In: Melmed S, Auchus RJ, Goldfine AB, , Rosen CJ, Kopp PA, eds. Williams Textbook of Endocrinology. 15th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2025:chap 26.
Ali O, Donohoue PA. Hypofunction of the testes. In: Kliegman RM, St. Geme JW, Blum NJ, et al, eds. Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics. 22nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2025:chap 623.
Bhasin S, Brito JP, Cunningham GR, et al. Testosterone therapy in men with hypogonadism: an Endocrine Society clinical practice guideline. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2018;103(5):1715-1744. PMID: 29562364 pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/29562364/.
Garibaldi LR, Chemaitilly W. Physiology of puberty. In: Kliegman RM, St. Geme JW, Blum NJ, et al, eds. Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics. 22nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2025:chap 599.
Swerdloff RS, Wang C. The testis and male hypogonadism, infertility, and sexual dysfunction. In: Goldman L, Cooney CA, eds. Goldman-Cecil Medicine. 27th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2024:chap 216.
Wierman ME, Arlt W, Basson R, et al. Androgen therapy in women: a reappraisal: an Endocrine Society clinical practice guideline. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2014;99(10):3489-3510. PMID: 25279570 pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/25279570/.
Review Date 7/21/2024
Updated by: Sandeep K. Dhaliwal, MD, board-certified in Diabetes, Endocrinology, and Metabolism, Springfield, VA. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.Testosterone Replacement Therapy
Many men have lowered testosterone levels as they age, and these low levels can start to cause a variety of symptoms. Male hormone replacement therapy, or TRT therapy, is a safe and effective treatment option if you have symptoms or difficulty with low testosterone levels.
Individualized, long-term testosterone therapy has been shown to improve bone density, stabilize mood, normalize body fat and body muscle, increase energy, and increase libido.
Hypogonadism Symptoms
If your testosterone levels are low, you may be feeling some of the following symptoms (depending on your age):
- Low sex drive
- Low energy
- Poor concentration
- Weight gain
- Loss of muscle strength
- Low bone density
- Depression
- Erectile dysfunction
- Low sperm count
Many treatments are available to get testosterone back to normal levels. It is important to monitor your levels as well as some related blood tests, as it can be dangerous to have testosterone levels that are too high.
Find a Urology Specialist
Ask the Expert: Testosterone Levels
TRT Therapy
To determine if you have low testosterone, we will review your symptoms and do laboratory tests. A good first screening test is the ADAM questionnaire. If we suspect low testosterone, we get a blood test from you. This may need to be repeated.
Treatment options can include these:
- Intramuscular injections
- Patches
- Absorbable tablets
- Creams
- Gels
- Long-acting depots
It is important to remember that having a level of testosterone that is too high is dangerous.
You must use your testosterone medication only as we direct. This includes needle safety for injection therapy as well as limiting exposure to testosterone gel to your friends and family.
It is also important for you to participate in laboratory and follow-up visits to our office. We will monitor your response to testosterone therapy closely.
What Are the Side Effects of Testosterone Therapy?
As with any new medication, you may notice side effects from your testosterone therapy. This may include, but are not limited to, the following:
- Pain at the injection site, if you are using injection therapy
- Increased energy
- Increased libido (sex drive)
- Acne
- Increased aggression
- Increased hematocrit, or red blood cell count
- Increased prostate size
If you have questions or concerns about your new medication, or if you develop significant side effects, please contact our office at 801-587-1454.
TRT Therapy Long Term
Long-term testosterone replacement therapy can also limit the amount of testosterone made within your body. This can affect your fertility, as having less testosterone within the testes can cause a significant decrease in your sperm production.
Please contact us if you have further concerns regarding fertility.
Contact Us
If you would like have your testosterone levels measured, please call our office at 801-587-1454.
- Bhasin S, Cunningham G, Matsumoto A, Snyder P, Swerdloff R, Montori V. Testosterone therapy in adult men with androgen deficiency syndromes: An endocrine society clinical practice guideline. Journal of Clinical Endocrinology & Metabolism. 2006; 91(6):1995-2010.
- De Ronde W. Testosterone gel for the treatment of male hypogonadism. Expert Opinion on Biologic Theory. 2009 Feb;9(2):249-253.
- Laksham K, Basaria S. Safety and efficacy of testosterone gel in the treatment of male hypogonadism. Clinical Interventions in Aging. 2009;4:397-412.
Hear From Our Specialists
Lifestyle Changes That Can Boost Testosterone Levels
There are a lot of natural products that claim they can increase your testosterone levels. But according to Dr. James Hotaling, none of them have been proven to help. There are, however, some lifestyle changes you can make that are supported by research. Find out what they are and also what you should avoid if you want to increase your low-T.
The Facts About Testosterone Treatment
Your energy level is down, you're putting on weight, your mood is affected and your sex drive is decreased. You might have low testosterone. Ads for testosterone therapy flood the television and it looks pretty easy to get. Should you get it? Get the facts about testosterone treatments and why some men may need it.
Why a Doctor Should Monitor Your Testosterone Treatments
If you're on testosterone treatments, it's important to be regularly monitored by a physician to avoid potential risks. Dr. Jim Hotaling is an urologist and men's health expert at University of Utah Health. Find out what the potential risks are and why it's really important to have a supervising physician and periodic lab tests if you are on testosterone treatments.Body Mass Index (BMI)
Your score, , indicates that while weight may not be an immediate concern for you, it is something you and your doctor should monitor during routine physical exams.
Your score, , indicates that you might benefit from an evaluation of your weight condition.
Your score, , indicates you might benefit from a thorough evaluation of your weight condition.
Your provided responses
Call for an Appointment: 319-467-2000
What is it?
The body mass index is a numerical value of your weight in relation to your height. BMIs are good indicators of healthy weights for adults, regardless of body frame size.
The BMI Calculator is not accurate for all body types. It may overestimate body fat in athletes and others who have a muscular build and may underestimate body fat in older persons and others who have lost muscle.
To assess if your weight is within a healthy range for your body type, contact your health care provider.
What you can do now about your weight
- Schedule a complete physical with your doctor. If you don’t have a primary care physician, we invite you to make an appointment with our primary care team.
- Ask your doctor these questions about your present weight:
- Do I need to lose weight for my health?
- What are my blood sugar and cholesterol levels?
- How much physical activity do I need to maintain a healthy weight?
- What is a healthy eating plan for me?
Heart Health
Your answers to the questions about heart disease indicate that while heart disease may not be an immediate concern for you, it is something you and your doctor should be monitoring during routine physical exams.
Your answers to the questions about heart disease strongly indicate that you would benefit immediately from a thorough examination of your heart condition.
Your provided responses
Call for an Appointment: 319-467-2000
Symptoms of coronary artery disease (CAD) include:
- chest pain
- shortness of breath
- unexplained fatigue
- lightheadedness
Causes
CAD results from the buildup of fatty deposits in the heart’s arteries. The buildups cause the arteries to narrow and become blocked, reducing blood and oxygen flow to the heart.
Who is at risk?
Men over 50 have a greater risk of CAD. Other indicators are family history of heart disease, alcohol and tobacco use, and physical inactivity.
Diagnosis and Treatment
If tests and imaging show the presence of CAD, treatment options may include medications, a procedure to physically unblock the arteries using surgery or a catheterization, and assistance in making lifestyle changes through cardiac rehabilitation.
What you can do now about coronary artery disease
- Schedule a complete physical with your doctor. If you don’t have a primary care physician, we invite you to make an appointment with our Internal Medicine care team.
- If your primary care provider has asked you to see a heart specialist or if you are looking for a second opinion, we invite you to make an appointment with our heart care team.
Emotional Well-Being
Your answers to the questions about depression indicate that while depression may not be an immediate concern for you, it is something you and your doctor should be monitoring during routine physical exams.
Your answers to the questions about depression indicate that you might benefit from an examination of your mental health.
Your answers to the questions about depression indicate that you would benefit immediately from a thorough examination of your mental health.
Your provided responses
Call for an Appointment: 319-467-2000
Signs of Depression
Clinical depression is a mood disorder characterized by overwhelming feelings of sadness, loss of pleasure, guilt and hopelessness that interfere with daily life.
Causes
Genetic, biologic, and environmental factors play a role in depression.
Who is at risk?
Depression is an illness that can affect anyone at any time in their life.
- Adults ages 49-54 are the age group with the highest rates of depression.
- While women have twice the rate of depression than men, the disease is not rare in men.
- Research suggests that depression in men may be associated with
- low tolerance to stress
- impulsive behaviors
- a history of alcohol or substance abuse
- a family history of depression or suicide
Diagnosis and Treatment
Your primary care physician may ask questions that might lead to further screenings and/or treatment. A mental health professional may administer a more comprehensive screening test and use it along with observed symptoms to make a diagnosis. Treatments are tailored to the patient and his condition. Options include counseling therapy and medications.
What you can do now about depression
- Schedule a complete physical with your doctor. If you don’t have a primary care physician, we invite you to make an appointment with our Internal Medicine care team.
- If your primary care provider has asked you to see a mental health specialist or if you are looking for a second opinion, we invite you to make an appointment with our psychiatry care team.
Sleep Apnea
Your answers indicate that your risk of significant sleep apnea is low. If you are still concerned about your sleep or other symptoms, you should be evaluated by your health care provider or someone from our primary care team.
Your answers indicate that you possibly have sleep apnea and may benefit from sleep apnea testing.
Your answers indicate that you very likely have moderate or severe sleep apnea and you should be tested for sleep apnea.
Your provided responses
Call for an Appointment: 319-467-2000
Signs of Obstructive Sleep Apnea
Partners or other family members might notice the person begins snoring heavily soon after falling asleep and the snoring gets louder. The snoring can be interrupted by a long silent period when there is no breathing. The pause is followed by a loud snort or gasp as the person attempts to breathe.
People with sleep apnea probably are not aware that they stop breathing intermittently during sleep. Sleep apnea can be associated with morning headaches, fatigue, high blood pressure, heart burn, problems concentrating or mood and memory changes.
Obstructive sleep apnea happens when air flow pauses or decreases because of a narrowed or blocked airway during sleep. Not everyone who snores has sleep apnea.
Other factors that increase your risk include the shape and condition of the airway, large tonsils, large neck size, large tongue, and obesity.
Diagnosis and Treatment
Besides gathering a health history and performing a physical exam, your doctor might order a sleep study. Signals from electrodes placed on your body record your heart rate and breathing during different stages of sleep. The goal of treatment is to keep the airway open so that breathing does not stop during sleep.
Treatment options include lifestyle changes, such as weight loss and avoiding alcohol or sedatives at bedtime, surgical procedures, and use of a continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) machine that keeps the airway open using air pressure.
What you can do now about obstructive sleep apnea
- Schedule a complete physical with your doctor. If you don’t have a primary care physician, we invite you to make an appointment with our primary care team.
- If your primary care provider has asked you to see a sleep specialist or if you are looking for a second opinion, we invite you to make an appointment with our sleep clinic team.
- Ask your doctor these questions about your sleep health:
- Do I need a sleep study?
- What are the health risks associated with sleep apnea?
- What lifestyle changes can I make to help treat sleep apnea?
- Will I need to wear a CPAP device?
Testosterone Level
Your answers to the questions about low testosterone indicate that while low T may not be an immediate concern for you, it is something you and your doctor should discuss during routine physical exams.
Your answers to the questions about low testosterone indicate that you might benefit soon from an examination of your urologic condition.
Your answers to the questions about low testosterone strongly indicate that you would benefit immediately from a thorough examination of your urologic condition.
Your provided responses
Call for an Appointment: 319-467-2000
Signs of Low Testosterone (Low T)
The signs can be physical, emotional and sexual.
- Physical signs include: fatigue, decreased muscle mass, loss of hair, hot flushes and sweats.
- Mental or emotional signs include: feeling sad or blue, less motivation to do things, less self-confidence and enthusiasm, poor concentration and memory.
- Sexual signs include: reduced sex drive, erectile dysfunction.
Cause
When a man’s body produces less than normal testosterone, the condition is called low testosterone or low T.
Who is at risk?
Approximately 40 percent of men over age 45 may have low testosterone, and the likelihood of being affected rises as men get older. Low T is more common in men who are:
- obese
- type-2 diabetic
- have high cholesterol
- have high blood pressure
Diagnosis and Treatment
Based on symptoms you may be experiencing, you may want to have your testosterone levels checked by a blood test. Treatment for the condition includes testosterone gels, patches and injections.
What you can do now about low testosterone
- Schedule a complete physical with your doctor. If you don’t have a primary care physician, we invite you to make an appointment with our Internal Medicine care team.
- If your primary care provider has asked you to see a urologist or if you are looking for a second opinion, we invite you to make an appointment with our urology care team.
- Ask your doctor these questions about low testosterone:
- What is the cause of my low testosterone?
- Is testosterone replacement an option for me?
- When should I get my testosterone level retested?
Sexual Health
Your answers to the questions about erectile dysfunction indicate that while ED may not be an immediate concern for you, it is something you and your doctor should be monitoring during routine physical exams.
Your answers to the questions about erectile dysfunction indicate that you might benefit soon from an examination of your urologic condition.
Your answers to the questions about erectile dysfunction strongly indicate that you would benefit immediately from a thorough examination of your urologic condition.
Your provided responses
Call for an Appointment: 319-467-2000
Signs of Erectile Dysfunction (ED)
ED is the persistent inability to achieve or maintain an erection firm enough to have sexual intercourse.
Causes
Many factors can contribute to ED. The three biggest factors are poor blood circulation, often caused by hypertension (high blood pressure), diabetes, and side-effects of some types of medications.
Who is at risk?
ED affects approximately 1 in 5 American men over the age of 20.
Diagnosis
Diagnosis of erectile dysfunction is generally made after a thorough interview about your personal and sexual medical history.
Treatment Options
After a thorough evaluation, your urologist can choose a from a variety of treatment options including:
- oral prescription medications
- drug-free assistive devices
- medications administered as injections or suppositories
- prosthetic devices implanted in the body
What you can do now about erectile dysfunction
- Schedule a complete physical with your doctor. If you don’t have a primary care physician, we invite you to make an appointment with our Internal Medicine care team.
- If your primary care provider has asked you to see a urologist or if you are looking for a second opinion, we invite you to make an appointment with our urology care team.
- Ask your doctor these questions about erectile dysfunction:
- What treatment is best for me?
- How long will I have to take medicine for erectile dysfunction?
- Am I healthy enough for normal sexual activity?
- How can I talk with my partner about my problem?
- Are any of my medicines causing this problem?
Lower Urinary Tract
Your answers to the questions about lower urinary tract symptoms indicate that while incontinence may not be an immediate concern for you, it is something you and your doctor should be monitoring during routine physical exams.
Your answers to the questions about lower urinary tract symptoms indicate that you might benefit soon from an examination of your urologic condition.
Your answers to the questions about lower urinary tract symptoms strongly indicate that you would benefit immediately from a thorough examination of your urologic condition.
Your provided responses
Call for an Appointment: 319-467-2000
Signs
Lower urinary tract symptoms could be signs of an enlarged prostate, known as benign prostatic hypertrophy or BPH. However, lower urinary tract symptoms can also be caused by conditions of the bladder. Symptoms may include dribbling at the end of urinating, an inability to urinate, urinary frequency and urgency, or incomplete emptying of your bladder.
Causes
Many factors have been found to contribute to the development of urinary symptoms, including an enlarged prostate (benign prostatic hyperplasia or BPH), diabetes, and advancing age. Additionally, in men whose primary symptom is urinating at night (nocturia), it may be a sign of kidney problems.
Who is at risk?
All men over the age of 40 are at risk for development urinary symptoms. Nearly 60% of men will experience one symptom by the age of 60. In men who have fathers with a history of symptoms due to an enlarged prostate are at risk of developing symptoms themselves.
Diagnosis and Treatment
Your doctor should gain a detailed medical history. Other tests may include a digital rectal exam to feel the prostate gland, a urine test to check for blood or infection, and a prostate-specific antigen (PSA) blood test to screen for prostate cancer, though prostate cancer rarely presents with urinary symptoms. Treatment may include medications that affect muscles within the prostate and decrease its size. In severe cases, surgical resection of the prostate may be required.
What you can do now about urinary incontinence
- Schedule a complete physical with your primary care provider.
- If your primary care provider has asked you to see a urologist or if you are looking for a second opinion, we invite you to make an appointment with our urology care team.
- Ask your doctor these questions about lower urinary tract symptoms:
- What are the symptoms of an enlarged prostate?
- Will these symptoms get worse?
- How do I know my problem is not prostate cancer?
- What are my options for treatment?
Thank You for using the University of Iowa Health Care Men’s Health Online Assessment
The feedback you receive is not meant to replace your own physician’s advice.
University of Iowa Hospitals and Clinics offers complete resources for men’s health, including primary care and specialty care in cardiology, urology, psychiatry, sleep disorders, and surgery.
We invite you to make an appointment at UI Health Care – Iowa River Landing. In this one convenient spot just off I-80 in Coralville, you can be seen by a number of specialists who can assess your health and begin to address your particular concerns.
Call for an Appointment: 319-467-2000
Members of the University of Iowa Men’s Health Clinic acknowledge the following sources that were consulted in the development of the Iowa Men’s Health Assessment.Is andropause the same as 'male menopause,' and should men worry?
By Michael Merschel, American Heart Association News
Thanks to menopause, almost everyone knows something about how age affects hormone levels – in women.
But while menopause has launched a thousand hot-flash jokes, men have their own version. It's called andropause, and though it's less of a pop-culture presence, it's a medical reality that's subject to misconceptions, experts say.
Starting with equating it to menopause.
In women, menopause is when menstruation stops. The ovaries stop producing eggs, and the production of estrogen declines. It typically happens around the age of 50 but can begin earlier.
In men, andropause is a decline in testosterone levels that can begin in middle age, then it's "a gradual fall," said Dr. Robert H. Eckel, a professor of medicine emeritus in the Division of Endocrinology, Metabolism and Diabetes and the Division of Cardiology at the University of Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus in Aurora. "It's nothing like menopause, which occurs over a finite period of time."
According to the American College of Physicians, a man's testosterone level begins to drop in his mid-30s and continues to fall at an average rate of 1.6% a year. A study published in the journal Virulence in 2016 calculated that by age 75, a typical man will have lost about 30% of the testosterone he had at 25.
Testosterone plays roles in sexual function, bone health, fat metabolism, muscle mass and strength. Levels surge in adolescence with puberty. But advice varies on when low levels should be a cause for concern.
Low testosterone is sometimes referred to as hypogonadism, and andropause can also be referred to as age-related hypogonadism, among other names. Low testosterone by itself, without symptoms, is not a cause for concern, Eckel said. "Andropause is part of the aging process, but it isn't a disease on its own."
Dr. Nannan Thirumavalavan, chief of male reproductive and sexual health at the Urology Institute of University Hospitals in Cleveland, said there's no "perfect answer" for how to distinguish between normal age-related decline and a more serious problem.
When testosterone levels fall, the most specific symptoms are a decreased sex drive or erectile dysfunction, said Thirumavalavan, who also is an assistant professor of urology at Case Western Reserve University School of Medicine. Other symptoms can include difficulty concentrating, decreased energy or even depression.
Of course, "there are many, many things that could cause those symptoms," he said.
In younger men, low testosterone can indicate problems with the pituitary gland or the testicles, Thirumavalavan said. But testosterone levels also can be affected by some of the same factors linked to cardiovascular disease, such as obesity, sleep quality and sleep apnea.
People with Type 2 diabetes, another cardiovascular risk factor, or kidney disease also tend to have lower testosterone levels, Eckel said, adding that "it needs to be made clear that, although related, the causation is not clear."
Observational studies have shown that men with unusually low testosterone levels appear to have a higher risk of cardiovascular disease, but that's not the same as showing a cause and effect, Eckel said. "Is the risk for cardiovascular disease that occurs in those settings entirely due to lower levels of testosterone? Certainly not."
A declining testosterone level, Eckel said, isn't necessarily a concern unless it goes beyond a modest decline in sexual function. But if lower testosterone is accompanied by a loss of muscle, excess fatigue, anemia or profound sexual dysfunction, then the patient should be evaluated by an endocrinologist, he said.
"Male hypogonadism in the older man is a challenging diagnosis to make," Eckel said, requiring "both biochemical measurements and a good history and physical examination."
The diagnosis requires multiple blood tests, Thirumavalavan said. A normal testosterone reading can vary from man to man, and levels fluctuate throughout the day. "We never want to just treat a number," he said.
But while treatments for low testosterone – sometimes called "low T" – have been heavily marketed in recent years, Eckel said guidelines from the Endocrine Society don't support routine testing of testosterone levels. Those guidelines say low testosterone readings alone, without symptoms, don't establish hypogonadism, and the benefits and adverse consequences of long-term testosterone therapy "on patient-important outcomes in asymptomatic men with low T concentrations remain unclear."
For men older than 65, the guidelines suggest offering therapy "on an individualized basis after explicit discussion of the potential risks and benefits."
Many men seek testosterone therapy because of libido issues. "There's no question that sexual function declines with age, and that's probably normal aging," Eckel said. Testosterone therapy provides "a modest improvement in sexual function," he said. It won't turn a 75-year-old man into a 25-year-old, "but it's a little bit better."
A man seeking help for symptoms of low testosterone could start by talking to his primary care doctor, urologist or endocrinologist for a workup, Thirumavalavan said. But testosterone therapy is not a casual treatment, he said. It "basically will shut down your own testicles," he said, ceasing sperm production – a problem for someone hoping to father children. (Testosterone is being studied as a hormonal form of birth control for men.)
Other potential side effects, Thirumavalavan said, include acne and increased blood pressure. Eckel said testosterone therapy also can lead to an enlarged prostate.
The Food and Drug Administration requires manufacturers of testosterone products to warn users about a possible increased risk of heart attacks and strokes. Eckel noted, however, that a major study published last year in the New England Journal of Medicine showed that testosterone replacement therapy did not increase risks of major cardiac problems in middle-aged and older men. It was an important step in showing that testosterone replacement can be done safely, Eckel said.
American Urological Association guidelines say that someone who has had a cardiovascular event should not begin testosterone therapy until three to six months afterward.
Over-the-counter supplements are not an alternative, Thirumavalavan said. Although the market is booming, there's no evidence that the most common ingredients in them work, according to a review he co-wrote that was published in 2019 in The Journal of Sexual Medicine.
Generally, he said, men can improve their testosterone levels by getting quality sleep, losing excess weight, eating a healthy diet and exercising.Is Male Menopause a Real Thing?
Male menopause — a description for the symptoms that can affect men of a certain age — is real, but it’s not necessarily what popular culture makes it out to be. Nevertheless, the term is popular because it provides an easy comparison to women’s change of life.
“People like to think of it as a parallel to what women go through in menopause,” says Thomas A. Masterson, M.D., a urologist with the University of Miami Health System. “But it’s not the equivalent for men.”
Male menopause has a different pathology, and it’s not as clearly defined. For example, a woman enters menopause 12 months after her last period, when her ovaries stop producing estrogen and no longer release eggs. This marks the end of her fertility.
Men, on the other hand, “produce sperm and can father a child until they die,” Dr. Masterson says. In other words, a man’s fertility is not affected by this change of life.
That said, as men age, they, too, undergo hormonal changes, however different they may be from changes in women. Male menopause is simply a popular way of describing a true medical diagnosis known as testosterone deficiency or low testosterone.
Men begin to experience a drop in testosterone as early as their 30s and 40s.
That is when hormone levels begin to drop about 1% to 3% a year. Unlike all women who go through menopause eventually, not all men will develop low T. In fact, most don’t. Once they reach their 60s and 70s, only about 10% to 30% percent of men meet the clinical threshold for the diagnosis, Dr. Masterson said.
Normal testosterone levels, when measured in the blood, range between 300 and 750 nanograms per deciliter (ng/dL). When it falls below the floor of 300, it is considered a testosterone deficiency. “It’s not so much about the numbers but the symptoms,” Dr. Masterson says. That’s usually what brings the men in for a medical evaluation.
Testosterone deficiency symptoms include low libido, weak erections, low energy, and weight gain.
Some men also report having trouble focusing and putting on muscle even when they exercise. Those signs, however, are also typical of other conditions such as diabetes, obesity and chronic stress. That’s why it’s so important for a man to consult his primary care physician for evaluation.
“You have to tease it out,” Dr. Masterson says. “Is it low T or something else or both? We know that low testosterone tends to go with other underlying conditions.”
Several health conditions can lead — and exacerbate — low T.
Weight is one of them. Men who are obese are five times more likely than non-obese men to develop low T. A physician must determine if low testosterone is the cause of weight gain or if the extra weight is the cause of low T.
Sleep apnea and diabetes also contribute to the lower nocturnal secretion of testosterone in older men. Poor sleep has been shown to lead to low T levels, and men with type 2 diabetes are twice as likely as men without diabetes to suffer from low testosterone. Knowing if a patient has these conditions helps the urologist determine treatment.
“We look for medically reversible conditions,” Dr. Masterson says. “If we can rule those out, the option is to replace [testosterone].”
While “low testosterone is highly unlikely to kill you,” he adds, most patients are eager to get some form of treatment. “It’s the symptoms that bother them. What troubles them most is their low libido and erectile dysfunction. They feel sort of emasculated.”
When to treat and how much to treat symptoms of low-T is a discussion that men should have with their doctors.
Dr. Masterson tells his patients there are side effects to treatment that a patient should consider, especially since treatment is usually for life. Risks of hormone replacement therapy include blood clots, high blood pressure, acne, worsening male pattern baldness, and the risk of prostate cancer.
Most men, he says, opt for hormone replacement therapy anyway. Treatment comes in gels, patches, oral medications and injections. Patients tend to prefer injections because it’s the often the most reliable way of getting the drug into the body.
Though treatment is effective, Dr. Masterson says it can lower sperm production and fertility.
“They need to consider this if they want to have children,” he says.
Dr. Masterson also recommends changes in lifestyle – healthier diet and exercise – which can prevent the co-morbidities that lead to low T. He also points out that, contrary to the misinformation found on social media, “a vegetarian diet does not decrease testosterone. It is not a factor at all.”
He also has one more word of caution for young men who are using testosterone inappropriately because they believe their levels are low for their age.
Most men on injectable T will experience low sperm production.
Though this may be reversible, “it can lead to infertility,” he warns, adding that 6 out of 10 men will stop making testosterone altogether.
Ana Veciana-Suarez is a regular contributor to the University of Miami Health System. She is a renowned journalist and author who has worked at The Miami Herald, The Miami News, and The Palm Beach Post. Visit her website at anavecianasuarez.com or follow @AnaVeciana on Twitter.
Tags: decline in testosterone, Dr. Thomas Masterson, symptoms of low testosterone, symptoms of male menopauseYou may have heard people refer to “male menopause” when talking about middle-aged men. It’s a way of comparing the midlife changes men go through to the changes women go through during menopause.
So, is male menopause real? Do men have hot flashes? Do they experience mood swings?
The answer is yes — and no. Read on for details about this common but confusing collection of symptoms.
What Is Male Menopause?
“Male menopause” is not a scientific term. Rather, it’s a phrase that people have begun using recently in everyday speech.
Male menopause refers to a cluster of symptoms that many (but not all) men experience in middle age. Some people think that these symptoms mimic those of menopausal women.
Hormone Changes: Men vs. Women
When women go through menopause, their bodies experience many changes in a short amount of time. Ovulation ends and hormone production drops rapidly.
Unlike women, men don’t experience a sudden drop in hormone production. Rather, starting in their thirties, men’s testosterone levels decrease slowly. The change in hormone levels is about 1% each year.
Never Miss a Beat!
Subscribe to Our HealthBeat Newsletter!
Thank you for subscribing!
You can now select the specific newsletters you'd like to receive.
You are already subscribed.
Subscribe to more newsletters in our email preference center.
Sorry, an error occurred. Please try again later.
Get Healthy Tips Sent to Your Phone!
Do Men Have Hot Flashes?
Hot flashes — a sudden sensation of body heat — are common in menopausal women. They occur when hormone levels drop rapidly in middle age.
Men typically do not get hot flashes, because their hormone levels drop gradually. The exception is men who undergo prostate cancer treatments. Those treatments quickly lower the amount of testosterone in the body and may result in hot flashes.
What Are Male Menopause Symptoms?
Gradually decreasing testosterone levels may cause symptoms of male menopause, including:
- Depression.
- Difficulty sleeping.
- Fat redistribution (i.e. developing a large belly).
- Fatigue.
- Hot flashes.
- Inability to concentrate.
- Irritability.
- Loss of muscle mass.
- Low sex drive.
- Mood swings.
- Weight gain.
At What Age Do Symptoms Occur?
So-called male menopause symptoms begin in middle age, usually when a man is in his 40s and 50s. That’s the time when testosterone declines and other health problems typically set in.
There’s no specific timeline for how long male menopause symptoms last. But health problems such as heart disease and diabetes may prolong male menopause symptoms.
What Causes Male Menopause Symptoms?
A combination of issues may cause male menopause symptoms. Some are:
Low testosterone
Low testosterone may be responsible for many of the symptoms we call male menopause. When your body doesn’t make enough testosterone, you may have:
- A drop in your libido (sex drive).
- Decreased bone mass.
- Decreased muscle strength.
- Enlarged or tender breasts.
- Erectile dysfunction.
- Low energy.
- Low sperm count.
Lifestyle issues
A man’s lifestyle can contribute to male menopause symptoms. Some factors are:
- A poor diet.
- Drinking too much alcohol.
- Lack of sleep.
- Low self-esteem.
- Not enough exercise.
- Relationship problems.
- Smoking.
Health conditions
Many health problems common to middle-aged men produce symptoms of male menopause. They include:
- Anxiety.
- Depression.
- Diabetes.
- Erectile dysfunction (ED).
- Heart disease.
- High blood pressure.
- Obesity.
Treatment for Male Menopause Symptoms
You should tell your primary care doctor about any troubling symptoms you’re having. They can run tests to check your hormone levels. Your doctor will treat you according to your symptoms.
Treatment for male menopause symptoms may include:
Stress management
Your doctor or therapist may recommend stress management techniques. Meditation, yoga, and exercise may help decrease symptoms of male menopause. Taking time off work and spending more time with friends and loved ones can relieve anxiety.
Lifestyle changes
Many middle-aged men live a sedentary lifestyle. Becoming more active and losing weight often helps reduce symptoms of male menopause.
Simple lifestyle changes can also boost your well-being. Eating healthy, getting regular exercise, and developing good sleep habits are all important.
Antidepressants
If you have depression or anxiety, your primary care doctor may refer you to a psychologist or psychiatrist. They may prescribe antidepressants along with therapy.
While male menopause isn’t a medical condition, hormonal and other age-related changes are real. Make an appointment with your doctor to discuss any troubling symptoms.
Testosterone replacement therapy
A blood test can reveal low testosterone. Your doctor may prescribe testosterone pills, creams, or gels. But hormone treatment can have side effects such as:
- Acne.
- Accelerated growth of existing prostate cancer.
- Enlarged breast size.
- Growth of benign prostatic hyperplasia.
- Heart problems.
- Reduced sperm production.
- Sleep apnea.
- Testicle shrinkage.
Talk to your doctor about the pros and cons before starting any hormone replacement treatment.
Sources
Scripps.org, Is Male Menopause Real? Link
NHS, The “Male Menopause" Link
Medical News Today, Is the Male Menopause Real? Link
Medicine.net, Male Menopause, Link
Harvard Health Publishing, Hot Flashes in Men, Link
UPMC Health Library, Hot Flashes and Menopause, Link
Cancer Research UK, Hot Flushes and Sweats in Men, Link
About UPMC
Headquartered in Pittsburgh, UPMC is a world-renowned health care provider and insurer. We operate 40 hospitals and 800 doctors’ offices and outpatient centers, with locations throughout Pennsylvania, Maryland, New York, West Virginia, and internationally. We employ 4,900 physicians, and we are leaders in clinical care, groundbreaking research, and treatment breakthroughs. U.S. News & World Report consistently ranks UPMC Presbyterian Shadyside as one of the nation’s best hospitals in many specialties.Cedars-Sinai Blog
Is Testosterone Replacement Therapy Right for Me?
Apr 10, 2025 Christian Bordal
Testosterone is popularly known as the hormone that makes men faster and stronger (and hairier), and also more prone to aggression and road rage. But testosterone plays a much wider and more significant role in the health of both men and women.
In the past two decades, men’s health has become a big topic, and testosterone has captured lots of attention. In particular, the use of testosterone replacement therapy, known as TRT, has surged. What used to be a treatment for mostly older men suffering erectile dysfunction has turned into a large industry marketing TRT to men of all ages as a way to build more muscle, boost energy levels and libido, sharpen them mentally and generally make them feel better.
In response to the demand, so-called low-T clinics and other online men’s health clinics have proliferated. According to one study, direct-to-consumer men’s health websites increased their unique visits 1688%—a nearly 17-fold increase—between 2017 and 2019.
So, should you be taking testosterone supplements? What do they do, and do they come with any side effects?
What Is Testosterone and What Is Testosterone Replacement Therapy?
“Testosterone is a hormone made naturally in the body by both men and women, although in men it’s made at much higher levels,” explained endocrinologist Nicolas Musi, MD, the Kathi and Gary Cypres Chair in Diabetes Research and director of Cedars-Sinai’s Division of Endocrinology, Diabetes and Metabolism.
In men, testosterone is made mostly in the testicles, and it plays an important role in the development of male sex characteristics, such as:
- Growth of the penis, testes and prostate
- Libido or sex drive
- Growth of facial and pubic hair
- Growth of muscles and bones
- Sperm production
“It also affects our mood, our sense of wellbeing and our thinking process and ability to concentrate,” said Musi.
Nicolas Musi Gomez, MD
Around age 40, men’s testosterone levels start to drop about 1% to 2% per year. Low testosterone, when the testes don’t produce enough, is called hypogonadism. Symptoms include:
- Reduced libido, erectile dysfunction and infertility
- Low energy, poor concentration and depression
- Loss of muscle, increased fat
- Poor bone strength
- Loss of body and facial hair
As the name suggests, testosterone replacement therapy is a way of replacing the missing testosterone and bringing it back to a “normal” level.
“There’s a lack of consensus over exactly where the cutoff should be,” said Howard Kim, MD, director of male reproductive medicine in the Department of Urology at Cedars-Sinai. “But low testosterone is generally considered to be between 200-300.”
That’s nanograms per deciliter of blood.
TRT comes in a few different forms: creams, patches, injections and pills.
Howard H. Kim, MD
How Do I Know if TRT Is Right for Me?
Low libido and erectile dysfunction are the best indicators that you should have your testosterone level tested. But testing it can be tricky.
“Testosterone levels have been shown to be very difficult to pin down,” said Kim. “First of all, you have to use a reputable lab. And you have to check multiple times to make sure you have the correct value, because it can fluctuate within the same person.”
Kim says if the test shows a low testosterone level and you have any of the symptoms, then you’re a candidate for replacement therapy. And studies show you’re likely to feel some benefits.
But what if your level isn’t that low? What if you just want to feel like all those young guys on social media who say they’re building muscle and losing fat, feeling energetic, mentally sharp, and lustful?
Musi and Kim both have words of caution.
“For testosterone to build muscle, we have to give high doses,” said Musi. “Bringing you to a low-normal level or a little higher won’t do it.”
And high doses have more potential adverse side effects:
- Sleep apnea
- Breast swelling
- Enlarged prostate
- Shrinking testes and infertility
- Increased risk of blood clots
- Acne
“Most importantly, your own testosterone levels will go to almost zero,” said Musi. “Your body says, ‘Oh, I'm getting all this testosterone from outside. Let’s shut down production.’”
“It’s not this magic elixir that’s going to solve all your problems.”
He says he sees a lot of young male patients who have been paying to get high doses of testosterone from a low-T clinic.
“They ask me to prescribe it,” Musi said. “They’ve stopped taking it because they don’t want to keep paying for it, but they can’t make their own anymore, and their levels are very low—and they feel awful.”
He says these men either have to ride it out, waiting six to 12 months for the body’s own production to start up again, or he will prescribe a low dose to help them feel better.
For men whose testosterone level is in the low-normal range, there’s not much clinical evidence that going on TRT to boost it a little will have any effect.
“We don’t want to discourage anyone from talking to their doctor and having their levels checked,” said Musi. “But if you’re just feeling a bit low-energy, fatigued or depressed, so many things could be responsible. It probably won’t be caused by low testosterone.”
“As far back as a century ago, it was thought to be a fountain of youth,” said Kim. “But it’s not this magic elixir that’s going to solve all your problems. Testosterone therapy may not be as dangerous as we think it is. But it may not be as helpful as we think it is, either.”Is Testosterone Replacement Therapy Safe for Your Heart?
A Cleveland Clinic-led trial looked at the safety of testosterone replacement therapy for patients with documented low levels of testosterone. Dr. Steve Nissen discusses the results that testosterone-replacement therapy did not result in a higher rate of major adverse cardiac events for some patients. Although safe in the patient group studied, researchers still urge caution when considering testosterone therapy.
Learn more about clinical trials in the Heart, Vascular and Thoracic Institute at Cleveland Clinic
Subscribe: Apple Podcasts | Podcast Addict | Buzzsprout | Spotify
Is Testosterone Replacement Therapy Safe for Your Heart?
Podcast Transcript
Announcer:
Welcome to Love Your Heart, brought to you by Cleveland Clinic's Sydell and Arnold Miller Family Heart, Vascular and Thoracic Institute. These podcasts will help you learn more about your heart, thoracic and vascular systems, ways to stay healthy, and information about diseases and treatment options. Enjoy.
Steven Nissen, MD:
I'm Dr. Steve Nissen, I'm the Chief Academic Officer of the Heart, Vascular and Thoracic Institute at the Cleveland Clinic. The use of testosterone in men as they age has been a very controversial topic. One of the major concerns has been whether it is safe for the heart to take testosterone replacement therapy. And this concern has been magnified by the presence of many so-called "low T centers", clinics where the primary purpose of the clinic is to administer testosterone to men. As a result of the controversy about the safety of testosterone, the FDA required the manufacturers of testosterone to conduct a large clinical trial to assess the safety in men with documented low testosterone levels. That mandate came in 2015, it took a couple of years to design the trial, and many more years to actually conduct it, particularly in the middle of the pandemic, but the results are now in.
What we did in collaboration with the makers of testosterone, is study about 5,000 men between the ages of 45 and 80, who had two levels of testosterone drawn, blood draws, and both had to be less than 300 nanograms per deciliter, which is the standard way testosterone is measured. But they also had to have symptoms of deficiency in testosterone, such as excessive fatigue, reduced sexual performance, reduced beard growth, and other hair growth, these are all signs of low testosterone. If they met the entry criteria, they were then randomly assigned to take testosterone in the form of a gel placed on the skin or a gel containing placebo, containing no active ingredients. The amount of gel was then adjusted over time to get the levels of testosterone into the normal range. Patients were then followed for an average of 22 months of treatment and 33 months of follow-up.
After those of us conducting the trial were unblinded, which means we were made aware of which patients got testosterone and which patients got placebo, we were able to analyze the data. And what the data showed was that a heart related event, something bad, happened in 7 percent of the patients in the testosterone group and 7.3 percent of patients in the placebo group. What that means is that there was no difference in the rates of heart related events in patients taking testosterone compared with patients who were taking placebo, but there are some cautions needed here. First of all, these were patients with very well documented low levels of testosterone on two occasions, drawn properly, which is in the morning, and they had to have symptoms. Their treatment was monitored very carefully, and their doses adjusted to get them into the normal range.
We have concerns that our study is not misused. This does not mean that people should take testosterone for body building or that athletes should take testosterone, or that men without a documented low level should take testosterone. And unfortunately, there is data to suggest that many of these so-called low T centers are giving out testosterone to people who would not qualify for testosterone in our clinical trial. So, we have shown that testosterone is safe, we urge caution in how it's used. We want people to understand that we only treated patients for 22 months so that we don't have evidence of safety, say with five years of use. That's a gap that we won't easily be able to close, but it is important for people to understand that there are limitations in the study, and that use of testosterone should be guided by a professional at a medical center that has experience with using testosterone and that can monitor patients closely for side effects, and also make sure that doses are adjusted in a proper way to get people into a normal range.
Now, there were some adverse effects observed that were not part of the primary reason for conducting the trial, but there was an excess of events of atrial fibrillation and there was an excess of events involving clots in the leg or clots in the lung. These were not common, but they were observed more commonly in the testosterone group than the placebo group. Therefore, we would recommend that men with a history of atrial fibrillation should be very cautious about taking testosterone, and individuals with a history of blood clots in the legs or elsewhere, should also be careful about taking testosterone. Overall, the study was very good in that it showed us that testosterone can be used safely, but it has to be used carefully. Thank you for your attention.
Announcer:
Thank you for listening. We hope you enjoyed the podcast. We welcome your comments and feedback. Please contact us at heart@ccf.org. Like what you heard? Subscribe wherever you get your podcasts or listen at clevelandclinic.org/loveyourheartpodcast.
Love Your Heart
A Cleveland Clinic podcast to help you learn more about heart and vascular disease and conditions affecting your chest. We explore prevention, diagnostic tests, medical and surgical treatments, new innovations and more.Is Testosterone Therapy the New Beauty Trend For Men?
Testosterone replacement therapy has become one of the most widely prescribed medications in the United States. While there could be benefits to the treatment for aging men, such as improvement in libido, bone density and quality of life, it also has possible side effects like hair thinning, water weight and shrinking testicles. Receiving testosterone can be a timely and costly commitment that should be discussed thoroughly with a medical professional.
What is low testosterone?
Testosterone, an essential hormone for men, helps power sex drive, reproductive abilities and the development of muscle and bone. The gradual decline in testosterone is natural with age but varies by person. The occurrence of low testosterone increases with aging and may be as high as 20% to 30%. Low testosterone (Low T), a condition where the testicles don’t produce enough testosterone.
Hypogonadism is when testosterone levels get too low. Symptoms often include:
- Lower sex drive and overall energy levels
- An increase in body fat and reduction in muscle mass
- Feelings of moodiness or laziness
- Reduced body and facial hair
- Small testicles, reduced sperm count and infertility
- Increased breast size
- Hot flashes
- Irritability, poor concentration and depression
- Loss of body hair
- Brittle bones and an increased risk of fracture
Low testosterone can be tied to various medical conditions, including autoimmune diseases, obesity, diabetes, pituitary disorders and heart failure. Some men with testosterone deficiency have symptoms or conditions related to their low testosterone that will improve when they take testosterone replacement.
There are times when low testosterone is not a bad thing. The most common example is prostate cancer. Testosterone may stimulate the prostate gland and cause prostate cancer to grow. Men taking testosterone replacement must be monitored carefully for prostate cancer. Although testosterone may make prostate cancer grow, it is not clear that testosterone treatment causes prostate cancer.
Blood tests can reveal if you have lower than normal testosterone levels, and treatment options are available. Physicians may recommend low doses of testosterone to improve your mental, physical and sexual health. The length of the process varies and how bodies may respond to the treatments. There’s still much unknown about testosterone replacement therapy and whether it’s necessary for men as they get older or if younger ones should consider it a new beauty trend.
What is hormone replacement therapy?
The National Cancer Institute says hormone replacement therapy is used when the body does not produce enough of a certain hormone. For example, hormone replacement therapy may be given when the thyroid gland does not make enough thyroid hormone.
It's natural for men’s testosterone levels to decrease as they get older. Hormone therapy is a solution, but it is not one that naturally replaces the missing hormones. Medical experts disagree about the health benefits of hormone therapy used to combat the natural aging process in men, especially given the risks. Most medical guideline organizations do not recommend testosterone therapy unless multiple testosterone levels are significantly low, and the patient is symptomatic.
If your doctor does recommend testosterone therapy, there are several options available:
- Intramuscular testosterone injections: The hormones are injected into specific muscles, and the medication will quickly circulate throughout the body. This method is one of the most common medical procedures administered every one to two weeks.
- Testosterone patches: Testosterone patches are applied daily to the body, like the arm or thigh, to release the dose of gel onto your skin. The patch can cause irritation.
- Topical testosterone gel: Testosterone gel is available by prescription and used to treat adult men with low or no testosterone. The gel can be transferred from your body to others and should be applied to the shoulders or upper arms that should be covered by sleeves. Testosterone may stop bone growth and cause early puberty in children and teenagers. If testosterone is used by a pregnant woman or is breastfeeding, it may harm the baby.
- Gum and cheek testosterone replacement: This treatment delivers testosterone through the gums above your top teeth.
- Nasal gel: Testosterone can be pumped into the nostrils as a gel, reducing the risk of transferring it to another person through skin contact.
- Oral testosterone:This oral testosterone pill is FDA approved and treats men with certain forms of low testosterone.
What are the side effects of testosterone replacement therapy?
Few studies have addressed potential long-term adverse effects associated with testosterone replacement therapy, but some potential negative effects of testosterone treatment include:
- Acne
- Erythrocytosis: A condition where your body makes too many red blood cells.
- Growth of metastatic prostate cancer: Metastatic cancer spreads from its site of origin to another part of the body.
- Reduced sperm production
- Decrease in testicle size
- Higher risk of blood clots
- Breast swelling
While the data is mixed, men on long-term testosterone therapy may have a higher risk of cardiovascular problems like a heart attack or stroke. In 2010, researchers halted the Testosterone in Older Men study when early results showed that men on testosterone replacement therapy had more heart problems. Also, testosterone therapy can suppress natural hormone production, particularly in older men, making it difficult to stop using it, according to experts.
In 2015, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration made drug companies add a warning to the drug labels for the potential increased risk of heart attack and stroke in men over age 65. For those under age 45, the possible side effects include an increased risk of infertility.
What should I consider before receiving testosterone replacement therapy?
There are natural ways to increase your testosterone levels before getting testosterone replacement therapy. Improving your diet, exercising, getting adequate rest and reducing stress can raise your testosterone. Significant weight loss in obese men has also increased testosterone levels. Approach testosterone therapy with caution if you have other medical concerns. Many experts are cautious about recommending hormone therapy to patients due to inconclusive testing results. Likewise, consider the cost of hormones, which is about $400 a month and are sometimes not covered by insurance. Discuss your health issues or concerns with your doctor before considering any drastic options.
Talk with your endocrinologist to determine if hormone therapy is a good treatment option.Many people may not automatically connect the dots between anemia and low testosterone levels, but low T is a contributing cause of anemia, especially in older men. Several clinical trials have indicated that testosterone replacement therapy can improve anemia and its associated symptoms in men with low testosterone levels.
Approximately 10% of older adults have anemia, with men being affected at a higher rate than women. Anemia is a condition in which you are not making enough healthy red blood cells. Red blood cells pick up oxygen from the lungs, transport it through the bloodstream, and deliver it to your body organs. If you have a significant decrease in red blood cells, then the tissues and organs in your body may not be getting enough oxygen. Understanding the underlying causes and long-term consequences of anemia is critical.
Anemia is diagnosed from a blood test called a complete blood count. Hemoglobin is a measured lab value, and hematocrit is calculated. Healthy hemoglobin and hematocrit levels for men and women:
- Hemoglobin levels 13.2 to 16.6 g/dL for men; 11.6 to 15 g/dL for women
- Hematocrit levels are 48% to 548% for men; 35% to 45% for women
What Are The Risks Of Untreated Anemia?
The symptoms of mild anemia are commonly nonspecific and are due to decreased oxygen delivery to organs in the body. All metabolic processes in the body require oxygen. Even a slight decrease in red blood cells can cause:
- Fatigue
- Lack of energy
- Weakness
As anemia worsens and body cells function with suboptimal oxygen delivery, metabolic byproducts build up in your cells. You may also experience:
- Headaches
- Dizziness
- Irritability
- Reduced ability to exercise
- Shortness of breath
- Irregular heartbeat
- Chest pain
There are many potential causes of anemia, including:
- Low iron
- B12 deficiency
- Low testosterone
- Sickle cell disease and other inherited blood disorders
- Problems with red blood cell production such as aplastic anemia
- Chronic inflammation
- Chronic kidney disease
- Myelodysplastic syndromes
- Chemotherapy
- Blood loss
In about one-third of people with anemia, no cause is found.
Knowing If Anemia Is Connected To Low-T
Although several studies have shown a connection between testosterone levels and anemia, The Anemia Trials of the Testosterone Trial is a clinical trial designed to determine whether men with unequivocally low testosterone levels and unexplained anemia would benefit from testosterone replacement therapy.
The Testosterone Trials are a series of 12 clinical trials to assess the results of testosterone supplementation in men with low T.
These trials were all placebo-controlled, double-blinded trials that enrolled 788 men.
- Sexual Function Trial: Testosterone increases sexual activity, sexual desire, and erectile function.
- Physical Function Trial: Testosterone increases the distance walked, but not the speed.
- Vitality Trial: Testosterone improves mood and depressive symptoms, but not energy.
- Cognitive Function Trial: Testosterone did not improve cognitive function.
- Anemia Trial: Testosterone increases hemoglobin in men with anemia of unknown and known cause.
- Bone Trial: Testosterone increases bone density and strength.
Participants had two testosterone measurements that averaged less than 275 ng/dL, and they had a low risk of prostate cancer. Of the 788 men enrolled in the trial, 64 had anemia with a known cause, and 62 had anemia without a known cause.
After 12 months, hemoglobin levels increased by 1.0 g/dL in 58% of men with unexplained anemia in the treatment group versus 22% in the placebo group. For those with explained anemia, 60% of the men in the testosterone replacement group no longer had anemia, versus 15% in the placebo group. Men who had improvement in their symptoms reported improvement in walking speed and vitality. They had improvements in general health, energy, walking ability, sexual desire, and memory. However, the improvements in general health and energy were the only statistically significant ones.
Researchers concluded that treatment with testosterone in men with low testosterone and anemia resulted in a significant increase in hemoglobin levels, whether the cause of anemia is known or not.
Low testosterone levels are associated with anemia, and:
- Decreased energy
- Mood changes
- Irritability
- Erectile dysfunction
- Reduced sex drive
- Enlarged breast tissue
- Disturbed sleep
- Increased body fat
The first step in determining whether low testosterone is causing your symptoms is to have your testosterone levels checked.
How Testosterone Therapy Can Help
Scientists have long been aware of the association between testosterone and red blood cell production. They attribute testosterone as the cause of the 1- to 2-g/dL difference in hemoglobin concentration between adult men and women. Men taking anti-androgen medications to treat medical conditions frequently experience anemia as a side-effect. However, their anemia commonly resolves when they take androgen treatment.
Experts are still working to understand the connection between testosterone and anemia. Testosterone may increase the production of erythropoietin (EPO). EPO is a hormone produced by the kidney, which stimulates red blood cell production.
Testosterone may also increase red blood cells by inhibiting the secretion of hepcidin, a peptide that regulates iron absorption. An increased amount of bioavailable iron can reduce the risk of anemia due to iron deficiency, enhance the ability of red blood cells to incorporate iron, and improve the lifespan for red blood cells.
Anemia can increase the risk of chronic disease and mortality. Anemia increases dramatically after the age of 50 and affects one in five people over age 85. Men who have anemia and low testosterone levels may benefit from testosterone replacement therapy to correct their anemia.
Testosterone replacement therapy for hypogonadism can have several beneficial effects:
- Increase in muscle mass and strength
- Increase in bone density
- Increase in red blood cell production
- Improved erectile function and libido
- Improved mood
- More energy
There is also risk associated with testosterone replacement therapy, including acne, sleep apnea increased estradiol, gynecomastia, and increased red blood cell production beyond what is needed which can increase the risk of blood clots. Men should also discuss their risk of cardiovascular disease and prostate cancer with their doctor when discussing whether to start treatment.
Conclusion
As you address the concerns of low testosterone and its connection to anemia, consider the benefits of Enclomiphene. Available at Invigor Medical, Enclomiphene can help manage hormone levels effectively, potentially improving symptoms of anemia associated with low testosterone. This treatment offers a strategic approach to enhance your overall health and hormonal balance. Buy Enclomiphene today to start seeing improvements in your energy levels and overall vitality.
Frequently Asked Questions
Can low testosterone cause anemia?
Low testosterone levels have been associated with anemia, particularly in men. Testosterone plays a role in stimulating erythropoiesis, the process of red blood cell production in bone marrow. Therefore, low testosterone levels may contribute to decreased red blood cell production, leading to anemia.
Can testosterone affect iron levels?
Testosterone can affect iron levels indirectly by influencing erythropoiesis. As testosterone stimulates red blood cell production, it may also influence the utilization and regulation of iron in the body. However, the relationship between testosterone and iron levels is complex and may vary based on individual factors and underlying health conditions.
Does testosterone regulate red blood cells?
Testosterone does play a role in regulating red blood cell production. It stimulates the production of erythropoietin, a hormone produced by the kidneys that stimulates the bone marrow to produce red blood cells. Therefore, adequate testosterone levels are essential for maintaining healthy red blood cell counts.
What can cause anemia besides low iron?
Anemia can be caused by various factors besides low iron levels. These include deficiencies in other nutrients like vitamin B12 and folate, chronic diseases such as kidney disease or cancer, bone marrow disorders, chronic inflammation, genetic conditions like sickle cell anemia or thalassemia, and certain medications or treatments like chemotherapy. It’s essential to identify the underlying cause of anemia to determine the appropriate treatment approach.Late onset hypogonadism (LOH), what does that mean for a man?
Hypogonadism is a condition many men experience as they age. Testosterone levels naturally decline over time, and this decrease can lead to significant health and quality of life (QoL) issues. Signs of low hypogonadism are erectile dysfunction (ED), loss of morning erections and lower libido. In this article, we will describe the problem, complaints, causes and treatment options.
What is LOH, and epidemiology
LOH is also called ‘adult male hypogonadism’. The definition from the EAU Guidelines tells us this: Male hypogonadism is a clinical syndrome which comprises of symptoms with or without signs and biochemical evidence of testosterone deficiency.
The main symptoms are a decrease of erectile function and morning erections, and a decrease of libido. Besides this, multiple organ functions can be influenced by lower testosterone levels in men affecting the QoL.
The prevalence increases with age because of lower levels of testosterone in the blood due to co-morbidities. The incidence of LOH accounts for a small percentage of total hypogonadism. More men are consulting a doctor thinking they have a low testosterone level. In men aged 40-79 years, the incidence of symptomatic hypogonadism varies between 2.1 and 5.7%.
According to the classification of LOH, it must comprise both persistent specific symptoms of ED and low libido and biochemical evidence of testosterone deficiency. Several drugs can also induce the testosterone level such as methotrexate, chemotherapy agents, and testosterone synthesis inhibitors like ketoconazole. Androgens resistance or decreased bioactivity can be caused by 5α reductase inhibitors, spironolactone. Drug induced oestrogen receptor blockades by clomiphene and tamoxifen. Of cause, other conditions like testicular diseases or orchiectomy can also induce hypogonadism.
The prevalence in men with type 2 diabetes (T2DM), metabolic syndrome, obesity and cardiovascular diseases is higher. Impaired glucose tolerance can be influenced negatively by low testosterone levels. A large study showed that testosterone therapy in men with testosterone level of <14 nmol/l reduced the proportion of patients with T2DM for two years.
The large European Male Aging Study (EMAS) showed a decline of testosterone level of 0.4% per year in TT and 1.3% in free testosterone. The Massachusetts Male Aging Study (MMAS) combined data and showed that associated comorbidity and obesity significantly decreased total and free testosterone. This leads to the concept op functional hypogonadism where testosterone treatment is discussed.
Diagnosis of LOH
The main approach to diagnosing hypogonadism involves a thorough history review of the patient, including sexual history, physical symptoms and psychological symptoms. Physical examination and laboratory diagnostics are also included. Obesity is frequently associated with LOH, the waist circumference and BMI should be measured.
To start, you can first determine TT. If decreased you can take a compete laboratory diagnostics with Luteinising hormone, TT, (calculated) free testosterone, Sex Hormone Binding Globulin (SHBG), PSA, glucose, lipids. Due to its negative influence on libido, prolactin can also be considered as first-line screening in patients with reduced sexual desire.
With increasing SHBG, the free testosterone decreases even more in comparison to the TT. Elevated SHBG can result from medication, hyperthyroidism, liver disease, ageing, smoking and HIV infection.
A testosterone level of < 12 nmol/l is a reliable threshold to diagnose LOH together with signs and symptoms of ED and libido loss. A calculated free testosterone of < 220 pmol/l can be suggested as cut off point as recommended by the EAU Guideline on sexual health. The testosterone level should be measured between 7.00 and 11.00 in the morning, preferably fasting. It should be repeated on two sperate occasions any time in between. Prolactin should be measured with suspicion of secondary hypogonadism and/or low sexual desire.
Before starting testosterone replacement therapy, try to safely eliminate drugs that can interfere with hypothalamic-pituitary axis. Rule out any existing prostate cancer as this is accounted for as a contraindication. Another contraindication is high haematocrit of >54% as testosterone therapy can increase haematocrit even more. Men with COPD and OSAS are associated with an increased risk as well.
Treatment of LOH
LOH can be treated with testosterone replacement therapy (TRT). Different modalities are available like gels and injectables. Besides this, lifestyle changes and weight loss in obesity men should be discussed with the patient as a first step to treat LOH and increase the testosterone level. A meta-analysis showed that a low-calorie diet can restore TT and free testosterone levels by reducing the oestrogen in the body by visceral fat loss. This restores the normal gonadotropin circulating levels. This can be reached by increasing the physical activity. Besides this, men can benefit more from combination of lifestyle change with TRT if symptomatic hypogonadal.
Injectable testosterone is available based on half-lives. Short acting formulas has the disadvantage of wide fluctuation in plasma testosterone levels and therefore often unpleasant for patients. Long lasting formulation of injectable testosterone allows the maintenance of a stable testosterone level with a ten to fourteen weeks frequency. This depending on the therapeutic range of 12-18 nmol/l.
Transdermal testosterone formulations, gel is the most frequently used application. It is applied on daily basis every morning and quickly absorbed in the subcutaneous tissue. It will be released over 24 hours. Local skin adverse effects are limited. It allows transfer of Testosterone if the skin is not covered by clothing or apply on skin which is not often touched by others. Several brands of testosterone gels are available in the European countries, mostly in pump bottle or sachets. The regular dosage is 40-50 mg per day.
The follow up of patients on TRT is described in the EAU Guideline on male sexual dysfunction. See below table.
Special consideration is required for patients with comorbidities. Men actively trying to conceive should not undergo TRT, as it is contraindicated. This impairs the spermatogenesis and sperm maturation through inhibition of the gonadotropin secretion of FSH. Male breast cancer is an absolute contraindication for TRT since testosterone influences the development of breast cancer by its conversion to oestrogen.
Effect of TRT on erectile function is the most common reason to start TRT. A meta-analysis showed that men with more severe testosterone deficiency (<8 nmol/l) experience more improvement on sexual function than men with mild hypogonadism (<12 nmol/l). The TRAVERSE study showed that hypogonadal men with pre-existing or high risk of cardiovascular disease did not experience better erectile dysfunction after two years of TRT. In more severe erectile dysfunction phosphodiesterase type 5 inhibitors can be advised in combination with TRT.
Other positive effects of TRT can be improvement of vitality and physical strength, mood and cognition. The evidence on these aspects is weak. (RL) The influence on body composition and metabolic function is also limited. However, the influence on osteoporosis and bone mineral density with very low TT levels of < 3.5 nmol/l is more pronounce and independent from age. But the risk of bone and hip fractures did not decrease.
Conclusion
LOH is a testosterone deficiency in men which mostly starts in adulthood or old age, not associated with congenital conditions or acquired by i.e. orchiectomy. A TT of < 8 nmol/l is defined as an absolute testosterone deficiency, whereas level of 8-12 nmol/l and free testosterone of < 220 nmol/l is defined as hypogonadism. Often a higher level of luteinising hormone is seen in these men. The testosterone in the blood should be measured between 7.00 and 11.00 AM, fasting. Testosterone treatment is advised in hypogonadal men with erectile dysfunction and can be combined with phosphodiesterase type 5 inhibitors. Besides this, it is advised to improve lifestyle and reduce weight. Use testosterone gels or long-lasting depot administration to treat testosterone deficiency. Counsel and follow up on men treated with TRT according to the recommended follow up scheme.
Literature/references
- Salonia A, Bettoocchi C, Carvalho J, et al. Guidelines on sexual and reproductive health. EAU;2025. pp.3-33.
- Yassin, A., et al. Testosterone Therapy in Men with Hypogonadism Prevents Progression From Prediabetes to Type 2 Diabetes: Eight-Year Data From a Registry Study. Diabetes Care, 2019. 42: 1104. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/30862651
- Wu, F.C., et al. Hypothalamic-pituitary-testicular axis disruptions in older men are differentially linked to age and modifiable risk factors: the European Male Aging Study. J Clin Endocrinol Metab, 2008. 93: 2737. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/18270261
- Mohr, B.A., et al. Normal, bound and nonbound testosterone levels in normally ageing men: results from the Massachusetts Male Ageing Study. Clin Endocrinol (Oxf), 2005. 62: 64. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/15638872
- Corona, G., et al. Body weight loss reverts obesity-associated hypogonadotropic hypogonadism: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Eur J Endocrinol, 2013. 168: 829. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/23482592
- Corona, G., et al. Treatment of Functional Hypogonadism Besides Pharmacological Substitution. World J Mens Health, 2020. 38: 256. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/31496147
- Corona, G., et al. The pharmacotherapy of male hypogonadism besides androgens. Expert Opin Pharmacother, 2015. 16: 369. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/25523084
- Isidori, A.M., et al. Outcomes of androgen replacement therapy in adult male hypogonadism: recommendations from the Italian society of endocrinology. J Endocrinol Invest, 2015. 38: 103. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/25384570
- Corona, G., et al. Meta-analysis of Results of Testosterone Therapy on Sexual Function Based on International Index of Erectile Function Scores. Eur Urol, 2017. 72: 1000. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/28434676
- Pencina, K.M., et al. Effect of Testosterone Replacement Therapy on Sexual Function and Hypogonadal Symptoms in Men with Hypogonadism. J Clin Endocrinol Metab, 2024. 109: 569. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/37589949Libido & Testosterone Replacement Therapy
A topic that is often discussed in Testosterone Replacement Therapy (TRT) is Libido. This is because there is a correlation between low testosterone and lowered desire for sexual thoughts/fantasies and sex acts including intercourse, collectively referred to as Libido [1].
Why is this seen? It’s well-known both anecdotally from clinical experience and seen in the literature that libido tends to decrease with age in both men and women [2][3]. There is a period in the chronology of all healthy males where sexual desire peaks. This is during puberty.
Why does this happen during this developmental period? When males reach puberty there is a sudden and massive cascade of testosterone/DHT and oestradiol. All of this is to stimulate growth and primary and secondary sexual characteristic development such as testicular descent, penile growth, and vocal changes as well as secondary hair growth, increased musculature growth also increased libido [4].
It is this sudden, large surge in the hormones or to give it another label, fluctuation that causes these amplified outcomes. This tells us that there is certainly a relationship between testosterone and sexual desire. The inverse of this is seen in aging men, where a reduction in libido is noted as we get older [5].
However, is it all to do solely with testosterone levels? The short answer is no. Whilst we see a link to testosterone levels declining as we get older and see a decrease in libido alongside this, libido is a complex process that is multifactorial.
There is a difference between what is called physiological arousal and the feelings of desire, also known as libido for sexual thoughts/fantasies and acts. There are six domains of physiological arousal with most of them concentrating on the psychological aspects [6]. The one we will focus on is the process of physical sexual arousal of the genitals on a cellular level via our hormone pathways. In men, having an appropriate amount of free testosterone for their age will allow for an extremely complex set of actions to occur to cause an erection. This set of actions is so unbelievably complex and incorporates both the sympathetic and parasympathetic nervous systems as well as somatosensory, supraspinal and central neural pathways [7]. As such it is an entire area of study in and of itself, so it would be impossible to go into to the intricacies of it in this article.
Earlier we mentioned that this complex set of processes is called physical sexual arousal. As has already been implied, it is not that simple. There have been studies [8] looking at real time MRI scanning of the male brain whilst being shown sexually stimulating images and videos. The results interestingly, showed activation and deactivation of the same regions of the brain but to wildly differing levels. It also demonstrated that the same three areas underwent activation, but the emotion centred areas (aka the paralimbic areas) showed differing levels of activity across study participants.
This is interesting as it shows that whilst the process of physical sexual arousal in men can be similar from a hormone and neurotransmitter perspective, our brains interpretation of how that makes us feel based on our interpretation of a visual stimulus, in the case of this study, impacted the level of desire. This is just one form of sexual stimulation being tested: visual stimulus. There are many others, audio, physical touch, speech, i.e., self-talk, be that out loud or internal, or being spoken to by a partner in a manner that evokes feelings of desire.
What Does This Mean For People On TRT?
Essentially, it means libido is complicated and not solely down to your male androgen and oestrogen ratio. It is important that this is optimal as the relationship between low testosterone and low libido is clear [9]. However, if all the other factors with regard to your current psychological state (stress, anxiety, sleep etc) are not optimal it will very likely impact on how you feel about engaging in, or even thinking about sexual acts/thought/fantasies.
Additional to this, relationship maturity has a part to play. It is well documented that those relationships that are long lived can, and do, tend observe a decline in frequency of physical intimacy [10] .In fact, there is a well-documented psychological phenomenon called “the Coolidge effect” [11]. This is well studied in animal models and shows a rapid renewal in sexual appetite when males have just copulated with a known female and then are presented with a de novo (new) female that is exhibiting signs of wanting to engage in sexual activity with the male. These females are mated with almost immediately. However, if the male is then shown the previous female, they appear unable to become aroused. Subsequently if you show them another new female then arousal occurs again. This demonstrates what is known as “habituation” and is a factor that leads to that decline in frequency of physical intimacy in long term relationships. This is also multifactorial. It is massively influenced by factors we do not even think of but just live with such as societal norms, religion, gender-based expectations and stereotypes, for example it can be expected that men should have a larger sexual desire than women and are immune to other factors inhibiting their libido and therefore are assumed to be the expected instigators of sexual activity in a relationship. That is one example of a common what is called “gender-based script” that we are brought up thinking is the norm [12].
These kinds of scripts, of which there are many place an inordinate amount of pressure on men and is in part what can lead to unconscious anxiety around performance which negatively impacts our libido and in many cases the ability to get and maintain an erection. When added to this that libido is not a constant, it is rhythmical, i.e. it is meant to have peaks and troughs, you can see how having the expectation that being on TRT will lead to a constant unwaveringly high libido may well lead to people being disappointed and thinking their TRT is not working properly if they do not see this effect.
What Does TRT Do For Libido?
Put simply, TRT will do the same thing for libido as it does for all other aspects of our lives, it won’t cure or fix everything. All it will do is normalise your male androgen profile and restore balance of your overall steroid hormone profile to allow you to do the things necessary to restore the order in other areas of your life. Are we saying that it won’t help raise a low libido for a man with low testosterone levels? Of course not! It will certainly help, but what we must be clear on is that having a constant stable level of serum testosterone when following a regime of daily microdosing of testosterone cypionate and HCG does not translate to a constant stable level of libido at all times. It is far too complicated a topic for things to be that simple. In fact, there is evidence that shows that a change in a steady state is what spikes changes in physiological response. Indeed, this is the science (albeit put very simply) behind how higher as required, or PRN dosing of erectile dysfunction drugs works [13].
To summarise; TRT can help a flagging libido [14] as it will raise both your total and free testosterone levels whilst ensuring an appropriate balance of your oestradiol levels. What it will not do is make you constantly think about, be ready for or wanting to engage in sex acts/thoughts or fantasies, which is completely normal. Personally, I do not think libido is the most sensitive marker for TRT efficacy; however, it is very specific. Have a read around sensitivity and specificity in research for more understanding of how important understanding the difference in those terms is.
As has been discussed above, libido is rhythmical, it is normal for it to wax/wane relative to multiple extraneous variables secondary to our male androgen profiles. However, daily microdosing of Testosterone Cypionate and HCG allows for the closest mimicking of our natural physiology [15] which allows us the baseline to ensure the best chance of normalising the rest of our physiological and psychological markers.
References
[1] Rastrelli, G., Corona, G. and Maggi, M., 2018. Testosterone and sexual function in men. Maturitas, 112, pp.46-52.
[2] Hayes, R. and Dennerstein, L., 2005. The Impact of Aging on Sexual Function and Sexual Dysfunction in Women: A Review of Population‐Based Studies. The Journal of Sexual Medicine, 2(3), pp.317-330.
[3] Chung, E., 2019. Sexuality in Ageing Male: Review of Pathophysiology and Treatment Strategies for Various Male Sexual Dysfunctions. Medical Sciences, 7(10), p.98.
[4] Breehl, L. and Caban, O., 2022. Physiology, Puberty. [online] Ncbi.nlm.nih.gov. Available at: <https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK534827/> [Accessed 3 April 2022].
[5] Shigehara, K., Kato, Y., Iijima, M., Kawaguchi, S., Nohara, T., Izumi, K., Kadono, Y., Namiki, M. and Mizokami, A., 2021. Risk Factors Affecting Decreased Libido Among Middle-Aged to Elderly Men; Nocturnal Voiding is an Independent Risk Factor of Decreased Libido. Sexual Medicine, 9(5), p.100426.
[6] Hazlett-Stevens, H. and Fruzzetti, A., 2021. Regulation of physiological arousal and emotion. Handbook of cognitive behavioral therapy: Overview and approaches (Vol. 1)., pp.349-383.
[7] Panchatsharam, P., Durland, J. and Zito, P., 2022. Physiology, Erection. [online] Ncbi.nlm.nih.gov. Available at: <https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK513278/> [Accessed 3 April 2022].
[8] Mouras, H., Stoléru, S., Bittoun, J., Glutron, D., Pélégrini-Issac, M., Paradis, A. and Burnod, Y., 2003. Brain processing of visual sexual stimuli in healthy men: a functional magnetic resonance imaging study. NeuroImage, 20(2), pp.855-869.
[9] Rajfer, J., 2022. Relationship Between Testosterone and Erectile Dysfunction. [online] PubMed Central (PMC). Available at: <https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1476110/> [Accessed 3 April 2022].
[10] van Lankveld, J., Jacobs, N., Thewissen, V., Dewitte, M. and Verboon, P., 2018. The associations of intimacy and sexuality in daily life. Journal of Social and Personal Relationships, 35(4), pp.557-576.
[11] Ventura-Aquino, E., Fernández-Guasti, A. and Paredes, R., 2018. Hormones and the Coolidge effect. Molecular and Cellular Endocrinology, 467, pp.42-48.
[12] Gurney, K., 2022. Mind The Gap. [S.l.]: Headline Book Publishing LTD.
[13] Dhaliwal, A. and Gupta, M., 2022. PDE5 Inhibitors. [online] Ncbi.nlm.nih.gov. Available at: <https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK549843/> [Accessed 3 April 2022].
[14] Hackett, G., 2011. Testosterone replacement improves Sexual Function, Aging Male Symptom and Depression Scores in a primary care population of men with type 2 diabetes. Journal of Men’s Health, 8(3), pp.238-238.
[15] Stevens, R. and Hearnshaw, J., 2020. Microdosing TRT – The Future of Testosterone Replacement Therapy – The Men’s Health Clinic. [online] The Men’s Health Clinic. Available at: <https://themenshealthclinic.co.uk/microdosing-trt-the-future-of-testosterone-replacement-therapy/> [Accessed 3 April 2022].This content was originally produced for audio. Certain elements such as tone, sound effects, and music, may not fully capture the intended experience in textual representation. Therefore, the following transcription has been modified for clarity. We recognize not everyone can access the audio podcast. However, for those who can, we encourage subscribing and listening to the original content for a more engaging and immersive experience.
All thoughts and opinions expressed by hosts and guests are their own and do not necessarily reflect the views held by the institutions with which they are affiliated.
Four Ways to Naturally Boost Testosterone Levels
Interviewer: You've been diagnosed with low testosterone. You don't want to do the creams and pills. Are there other things you can do? Dr. James Hotaling is a urologist and also an expert in men's health here at University of Utah Health Care. And guys that have been diagnosed with low testosterone, what else can you do, other than the creams and the pills?
#1. Weight Loss Is One of the Most Effective Natural Testosterone Boosters
Dr. Hotaling: There are really only three things that have been proven to naturally raise testosterone levels, the first of which is just weight loss. A lot of men are overweight and don't take great care of themselves. So, trying to have a normal weight can help a lot, even losing as little as 15 to 20 pounds can make a huge difference. So that's one thing.
Interviewer: And for guys, that's a challenge because, as we get older, we tend to put on about a pound of fat a year, I hear.
Dr. Hotaling: That's absolutely correct. We have a Men's Health Center that's based in South Jordan, and we actually have a nutritionist who a lot of our patients see because it's not that men don't want to take care of themselves. It's just that I think a lot of men view going to the doctor as a sign of weakness. So they need some help to learn how to take care of themselves. So that's the first thing.
#2. Lifting Weights Triggers Hormonal Benefits Beyond Testosterone
The second thing is exercise, particularly weight lifting. That's very clearly been shown to boost testosterone and human growth hormone. It's actually the only thing that can boost human growth hormone, which can then also drive testosterone.
Interviewer: Are we talking about Olympic strength-type training, or just going in and building up a sweat?
Dr. Hotaling: Yeah, just building up a sweat. Even lifting weights as infrequently as twice a week for 30 or 40 minutes can make a significant difference, and it can also boost your metabolism for one to two days after you do that. So it can help with weight loss.
#3. Healthy Eating Supports Weight Loss and Hormonal Balance
And then the third thing is just trying to eat a healthy diet, avoiding a lot of excess sugar and that kind of thing, which, again, ties into weight loss.
#4. Sleep Is Essential for Testosterone Production
And then, I guess, the fourth thing would be getting adequate sleep. We know that when men are sleep-deprived, that can make a big difference in their testosterone production. We particularly see problems in people who have shift work, where they work at night and their circadian rhythm gets all flipped around. Typically, testosterone peaks at about 4:00 a.m. along with cortisol. So that's all tied to your body's rhythms. And the amount of testosterone you have varies minute-to-minute and hour-to-hour. So those things are all things that can help.
What Should I Avoid to Increase My Testosterone Levels?
I think it's also really important to outline the things that don't help, or haven't been proven to help, if that makes sense.
Supplements and Boosters Have No Proven Benefit
Interviewer: I bet you alcohol is on that list, isn't it?
Dr. Hotaling: Yeah, it is. Again, that goes... that's what the biggest thing is. No supplement has ever been shown to make any difference. There are all kinds of natural testosterone boosters, DHEA. And Utah actually is the national, and perhaps the international, hub of supplements, and there is no data that any of that makes any sort of difference. And some of it may even be harmful for men. So that's one thing.
Some Hair Loss Treatments Can Lower Testosterone and Sex Drive
I think the other thing that men should watch out for... we also see a lot of men who take Propecia, or finasteride, for hair loss. And that can actually have effects on your testosterone, your sex drive, and even your fertility. So that's another good thing to avoid if you're concerned with that.
Interviewer: So, avoid the bad, do the good, and about how long until men start seeing maybe some changes?
Seeing a Doctor Regularly Is Key to Long-Term Health
Dr. Hotaling: Unfortunately, weight loss, for most people, is a slow process, especially if you're going to have sustained weight loss. I mean, you could lose at most one to two pounds a week. But I think if men stick to a healthy diet and lift weights, they should see a difference in four to six weeks and start feeling better. And there has been data that's essentially something that's been proven over and over again in the literature. Those are really the key things for men.
And I think the other really important thing men can do is just regularly see a primary care physician. Most men don't. Men seek health care at a rate that's about 30 or 40% lower than women. And part of the reason I'm in here talking to you today is that most of the things that bring men to see a doctor are urologic conditions because they disproportionally impact quality of life, and, we might say, men's functions, if you will. So I think it's just really important to get in and see a doctor regularly.
updated: July 17, 2025
originally published: January 13, 2016
Lifestyle Changes That Can Increase Testosterone Levels in Older Men
Testosterone levels drop with age, but medication is not your only option. Urologist James Hotaling, MD, shares evidence-backed strategies that can help men boost their testosterone naturally.
The Connection Between Diabetes and Erectile Dysfunction
Believe it or not, erectile dysfunction can be a symptom of diabetes. In fact, half of men diagnosed with diabetes experience erectile dysfunction within 10 years of their diagnosis.
Know Your BPH Risk Factors
At some point in their lives, nearly all men will experience some degree of prostate enlargement. Understanding the risk factors can help you be proactive with your health and potentially...
Should You Worry About Swollen Testicles?
Understanding what a swollen testicle means and how to treat it can go a long way to easing the mind and fixing the problem.Hypogonadism, or Low Testosterone
Hypogonadism, also known as low testosterone or “low T,” can lead to symptoms of:
• A decreased energy and libido
• Trouble building lean muscle mass
• Moodiness
• Difficulty concentrating
• Loss of bone density
Testosterone Replacement Therapy (TRT): Is It for You?
You must have some or all of these symptoms and have low testosterone levels verified by a blood test in order to be considered for TRT.
Evaluation & Choice: The First Steps
Before TRT, you’ll need an evaluation by your doctor for risk factors, like prostate and breast cancer.
Of the main options for TRT, each has its benefits and disadvantages. The decision about which one is right for you will depend on your personal preferences and a discussion with your doctor. In some cases, different insurance companies may cover one option and not another, which we’ll help you take into consideration.
Monitoring Your Treatment
While undergoing TRT, you’ll be monitored regularly (usually every 3-6 months) to confirm symptom control, measure your testosterone levels and check for potentially dangerous side effects.
The follow-up regimen usually consists of:
• Physical exam every 6 months, including digital rectal exam to assess for signs of prostate enlargement and prostate cancer
• Blood work every 3-6 months for testosterone levels and other hormones
• Blood work every 6 months for lipids, hemoglobin and hematocrit and PSA (prostate-specific antigen)
If the desired effects aren’t achieved with your initial choice, we can try a different option to see if it’s a better fit for you, your health and your lifestyle.
Types of TRT
You and your doctor can choose from a range of TRT options.Testosterone is the key male sex hormones that regulates fertility, muscle mass, fat distribution, and red blood cell production. According to the American Urological Association, about 2 men in every 100 have low testosterone. Washington University Urology experts answer common patient questions below.
Low testosterone is called hypogonadism. It is a failure of the testicles to produce the male sex hormone testosterone.
Low testosterone suggests that there is an inadequate amount of testosterone to stimulate the male hormone receptors on some cells in the body, such as in the male reproductive organs, muscles and bone.
Low testosterone can be treated most directly be taking hormone replacement therapy – testosterone supplement.
Testosterone can be taken as a:
- Skin patch – applied every evening to provide a slow release of testosterone through the skin
- Gels – topical gels applied daily to the underarm, back, upper arms, or thighs
- Pellets – injected into the buttock for sustained slow release of testosterone for several months
- Injections – often given by the patient every few weeks
- Oral medication – not recommended for the treatment of age related hypogonadism due to potential liver toxicity
Alternative methods to increase testosterone include improved diet and exercise.
There are 8 common signs of adult onset low testosterone:
- Erectile dysfunction
- Low sperm count (infertility)
- Depressed mood
- Decreased libido (sex drive)
- Lethargy (loss of energy)
- Sleep disturbances
- Decrease in muscle mass and strength
- Loss of pubic, facial and underarm body hair
The above symptoms are not diagnostic of low testosterone; all the above symptoms could be due to other causes. It is important to present your symptoms to your doctor for examination and testing.
If you have one or more of the above symptoms of low testosterone, your testosterone is level is measured with a blood sample.
An adult male’s testosterone should be between 270 and 1000 ng/dl. Testosterone levels peak at about the age of 20 years, and then the testosterone slowly declines with age. In younger men, the average testosterone level is in the range of 650 ng/dl. When the testosterone is under 300, we often will consider a several-month trial of replacement therapy.
Low testosterone can be due to a defect in the testicles or pituitary hormone axis. Primary testicular problems can be congenital, due to a genetic defect, or due to a loss of testicular function from radiation therapy, trauma, chemotherapy, mumps or testicular cancer. In older men, low testosterone is often due to a drop in the stimulation of the testes by the pituitary gland.
Many men can maintain good erections despite a low testosterone level. However, with low testosterone, there is commonly a loss of interest in sex and a resultant difficulty with achieving an erection.
Testosterone levels in the normal range help men to have a better overall sense of well-being and health. Low testosterone can lead to mood changes, anxiety and loss of energy. Men often become sedentary. A sedentary lifestyle relates directly to weight gain and ED.
Vitamins, nutritional supplements and “testosterone boosters” are not proven to increase testosterone levels. Supplements that contain precursors along the testosterone production pathway such as DHEA could improve testosterone levels, but there is no evidence that these increase the testosterone level in healthy men or men with a primary testicular defect.
Washington University Urology can provide options and treatments for low testosterone. Meet our specialists below.
Arnold Bullock, MD
Alan A. & Edith L. Wolff Distinguished Professor in Urology
Division of Urologic Surgery
- Phone: 314-362-8200Low Testosterone
Can affect many aspects of your life
Testosterone affects many aspects of men’s health, including sexual function and bone and muscle strength. When levels of this hormone are low, your health and well-being can suffer.
Patients need a prescription for testosterone replacement, supplements are available without prescription. But accurately diagnosing and safely treating low testosterone requires a doctor’s expertise.
Our urologists at the Henry Ford Men’s Health Center use specialized training and advanced techniques to restore testosterone balance. We work with you to determine the most effective treatments and help you feel like yourself again.
What causes low testosterone?
Testosterone levels typically peak in early adulthood. Starting in your 40s, testosterone drops 1 to 2 percent each year. While these small decreases are a natural part of aging, other factors can cause a faster decline, including:
- Obesity
- Diabetes
- Heart disease
- Alcohol or drug abuse
- Damage to the testicles from injury, chemotherapy or radiation
- Pituitary disorders
Symptoms of low testosterone
It’s a common misconception that low testosterone affects only your sexual health. When your testosterone levels are low, you can experience a range of symptoms including:
- Low libido
- Erectile dysfunction
- Depression or anxiety
- Fatigue
- Difficulty concentrating
- Loss of muscle mass
- Increased body fat
How we treat low testosterone
Treatments that alter your hormones shouldn’t be taken without expert guidance. At the Henry Ford Men’s Health Center, our urologists safely and effectively treat low testosterone.
We perform comprehensive testing to accurately diagnose your testosterone levels. If tests show you need treatment, we know how to successfully manage your symptoms while minimizing side effects.
We offer a variety of low testosterone treatments. Your doctor will help you decide the approach that is best for you. Options include:
- Gels: Testosterone absorbs easily through the skin. This method of dosing is called transdermal (meaning through the skin). You apply a thin layer of gel to an area of clean, dry skin at the same time every day.
- Patches: We give you a testosterone skin patch that slowly releases medication (transdermal dosing). You replace the patch at regular intervals prescribed by your doctor.
- Pellets: We insert testosterone pellets just under the skin of your upper hips or buttocks. The pellets gradually release small amounts of the hormone. You return to the doctor’s office every 3 to 4 months to have the pellets replaced.
- Injections: Testosterone injections are an effective way to raise testosterone levels. We typically give injections every one to two weeks.
Our testosterone replacement treatments can safely and effectively balance your hormones. If you think you may have low testosterone, specialists at the Henry Ford Men’s Health Clinic are here to help.Low Testosterone (Male Hypogonadism)
Almost 40% of men aged 45 and older have Low Testosterone (Low T), a condition where the testes don’t produce enough of the male sex hormone testosterone.
-
Ochsner Health is the leading nonprofit healthcare provider in the Gulf South. Ochsner inspires healthier lives and stronger communities through our mission to serve, heal, lead, educate and innovate.
-
Thank you for choosing Ochsner Health for your care. We are committed to making an ongoing difference in the health of our communities.
I need to...Services & Resources -
Connect to care at Ochsner. Click on a featured specialty on the list or search for a specialty.
Featured Specialties -
Ochsner is committed to a clinically-integrated research program with the ultimate goal of improving the health and wellness of our patients and communities. As the largest academic medical center in Louisiana, we are training the next generation of healthcare professionals to be leaders who can meet evolving healthcare challenges.
-
Discover Your Future At Ochsner! With unlimited growth potential, both professionally and personally, now is the time to start your future with Ochsner.
Call: 1-866-624-7637
Almost 40% of men aged 45 and older have Low Testosterone (Low T), a condition where the testes don’t produce enough of the male sex hormone testosterone.
- Decreased sex drive
- Decreased sense of well-being
- Depression
- Development of breast tissue (gynecomastia)
- Difficult with concentration/memory
- Erectile dysfunction
- Fatigue
- Hot flashes
- Decrease in body hair
- Increase in body fat
- Infertility
- Irritability/moodiness
- Loss of bone mass (osteoporosis)
- Muscle loss or weakness
Ochsner is home to a compassionate, caring team dedicated to quickly diagnosing your condition and getting you the treatment you need.
If you think you have low testosterone, don’t hesitate to see a doctor. To make an appointment, give us a call.
- Ochsner Medical Center - Jefferson Hwy.: 504-842-4083
- Baptist: 504-894-2887
- Kenner & River Parish: 504-464-8588
- Northshore: Slidell, St. Tammany & Covington: 985-639-3789, ext: 52761
- West Bank: 504-842-8780
- Baton Rouge: 225-761-5200
With male hypogonadism, the testicles don't produce enough of the male sex hormone testosterone. This condition can begin during fetal development, before puberty or during adulthood.
In primary hypogonadism, also known as primary testicular failure, the condition is caused by a problem in the testicles.
In secondary hypogonadism, there is a problem in the hypothalamus or the pituitary gland, the parts of the brain that signal the testicles to produce testosterone.
Aside from aging, Low T can be caused by:
- A congenital defect
- A head injury
- A testicle injury
- Acute (short-term) or chronic (long-term) illness
- Alcohol abuse
- Chemotherapy
- Chronic kidney failure
- Cirrhosis of the liver
- Estrogen excess
- Hemochromatosis (too much iron in the body)
- High levels of prolactin (a milk-producing hormone)
- HIV/AIDS
- Hormones used to treat prostate cancer
- Kallmann syndrome (abnormal development of the hypothalamus, a gland in the brain that controls many hormones)
- Klinefelter syndrome (when a male is born with an extra copy of the X chromosome)
- Mumps
- Obesity or extreme weight loss
- Opioid use
- Pubertal delay
- Radiation exposure or prior surgery of the brain
- Radiation therapy
- Sarcoidosis (a condition that causes inflammation of organs including the lungs)
- Sleep apnea
- Steroids (such as prednisone)
- Testicular or pituitary tumors
- Uncontrolled Type 2 Diabetes
- Undescended testicles as an infant
Low testosterone is diagnosed with a blood test. Since levels normally fluctuate throughout the day, testosterone levels should be measured in the early morning when levels are at their highest.
Your Ochsner urologist may suggest one of the following testosterone delivery methods:
Testosterone Injections: Giving yourself injections in the muscle at home is an effective and safe treatment method. Long-acting testosterone injections are also available. It can be injected less frequently but must be administered by a healthcare provider.
Testosterone Patches: A patch containing testosterone is applied each night to your back, abdomen, upper arm or thigh (you rotate locations to avoid skin irritation).
Testosterone Gels: Depending on the brand, you can either rub testosterone gel into your upper arm or shoulder, apply it under each armpit, or pump on your front and inner thigh. (Note: these gels require special care in making sure that the hormone is not accidentally transferred to another person)
Gum and Cheek Testosterone Replacement: This treatment delivers testosterone through the natural depression above your top teeth.
Nasal Gel: Testosterone can be pumped into the nostrils as a gel, reducing the risk that it will be transferred to another person through skin contact.
Oral Testosterone: This oral testosterone capsule is FDA approved, and it treats men with certain forms of hypogonadism.
Testosterone therapy is not without risks.
It may:
- Cause oily skin/acne
- Cause fluid retention
- Cause skin irritation
- Cause smaller testicles
- Contribute to sleep apnea
- Enlarge breasts or cause tenderness
- Increase your risk of a heart attack
- Limit sperm production
- Stimulate noncancerous growth of the prostate, causing urination difficulties
- Stimulate growth of existing prostate cancer and blood clots
We change and save lives every day. Your support makes it possible.
Sign up for our free newsletters to get the best of our healthy living tips delivered straight to your inbox.
We'd love to know more about you so we can deliver the most relevant content.
Which of the following best describes you?Ohio State urologists can help diagnose and treat men with low testosterone. Testosterone is a sex hormone that is important in male reproduction, health, and well-being.
Low testosterone, also known as hypogonadism or “low T,” is a disorder where the testosterone levels are below normal. Symptoms of low testosterone include decreased libido or sex drive, erectile dysfunction, depressed mood, decreased muscle mass. Low testosterone can be associated with steroid use, HIV, end stage kidney disease, and diabetes, but can also occur in men who do not have these problems.
Diagnosis
Diagnosis of low testosterone involves taking a medical history, physical exam, and laboratory work. Your doctor may need to repeat blood work more than once to confirm the diagnosis.
Treatment
Treatment options for testosterone replacement options include topical gels, transdermal patches, injections, and long-acting subcutaneous pellets. If you are diagnosed with low testosterone, you doctor can review these options with you to find one that works best. Men who are on testosterone replacement will need routine bloodwork going forward.New to MyHealth?
Manage Your Care From Anywhere.
Access your health information from any device with MyHealth. You can message your clinic, view lab results, schedule an appointment, and pay your bill.
ALREADY HAVE AN ACCESS CODE?
DON'T HAVE AN ACCESS CODE?
NEED MORE DETAILS?
MyHealth for Mobile
Low Testosterone
What is low testosterone?
Men who have low testosterone do not make enough of the male hormone called testosterone. This hormone allows men to produce sperm and to develop and keep normal physical male traits. Low testosterone is also called testosterone deficiency or hypogonadism.
Low testosterone can lead to problems such as loss of sex drive, erection problems, infertility, and weakened bones.
Our Clinics
RELATED CLINICS
Ste 110
Pleasanton, CA 94588
Phone: 925-534-6500
Low Testosterone
Our expert urologists design personalized treatment plans for men with hypogonadism (low testosterone levels), including testosterone replacement therapy.
Hypogonadism
low-testosterone
hypogonadism
low testosteroneLow serum testosterone, also known as hypogonadism or andropause, affects many men — up to 40% — after the age of 45. Your risk for low testosterone increases as you age.
What are the symptoms of low testosterone?
- Erectile dysfunction
- Low libido
- Reduced sexual activity
- Increased body fat
- Lower energy levels and fatigue
- Depression
- Reduced muscle mass
Risk factors for low testosterone include:
- Diabetes
- High blood pressure
- High cholesterol
- Obesity
- Opioid use
Treatments for Low-T
Testosterone Replacement Therapy
Your doctor can help increase your levels of testosterone with replacement therapy. With this therapy, you will receive testosterone through gels, pills, patches, or injections.
How is Low-T Diagnosed?
Blood Tests
Your doctor will take a sample of your blood to check your testosterone levels. They will also check levels of other hormones, such as estradiol and luteinizing hormone, that can cause low testosterone.
Prostate-Specific Antigen Testing (PSA testing)
Your doctor will also use a blood test to check your PSA levels. High PSA levels may mean you have prostate cancer, which can affect testosterone levels.
Why Choose UHealth?
Innovative, expert urology care at the Desai Sethi Urology Institute. Our team of urology experts delivers advanced care for all urologic conditions. We use the latest research and the least invasive procedures to help you feel better and recover more quickly. Our experienced urologists design a personalized treatment plan to give you the best possible results.
Advanced research in men’s health. Our urologists are dedicated to men’s health and conduct innovative research into many conditions. Our expert team has helped develop new minimally invasive and robotic surgical procedures to treat cancers, incontinence, and more. We give you access to leading-edge treatments and clinical trials that aren’t widely available. In addition, we have established the eighth fellowship program in the nation dedicated solely to teaching physicians how to care for men’s health.
Questions? We're here to help.
Our appointment specialists are ready to help you find what you need. Contact us today.Testosterone plays a crucial role in men’s health, influencing everything from energy levels and mood to muscle mass, bone density, and sexual function. Understanding the causes, symptoms, and treatment options is the first step toward reclaiming health and well-being.
Adam S. Baumgarten, M.D., MBA, assistant professor in the UAB Department of Urology, shares insights on the causes, symptoms, and treatment options for low testosterone in men.
Diagnosis and symptoms
Low testosterone, or hypogonadism, in men can result from a variety of underlying factors.
“Common causes include the natural aging process, obesity, chronic illness, genetic disorders, and the use of certain medications,” Baumgarten explained. “Diagnosing low testosterone involves assessing symptoms and confirming with a blood test measuring total testosterone.”
Additionally, lifestyle factors such as sleep apnea and substance abuse can contribute to decreased testosterone levels.
It is important to note that several other medical conditions can mimic the symptoms of low testosterone, including depression, sleep apnea, hypothyroidism, and anemia, among others. Because of this, a thorough evaluation is essential to ensure an accurate diagnosis and appropriate treatment plan.
Health impact
Low testosterone can affect mental health and energy levels, often causing fatigue, irritability, mood swings, and even depression. Over time, low testosterone can contribute to a range of serious health problems.
“These may include reduced muscle mass, decreased bone density with a higher risk of fractures, increased chances of developing diabetes and cardiovascular disease, infertility, and depression,” Baumgarten said.
Treatment and management
For many men, low testosterone can be effectively managed and improved through targeted lifestyle changes and, when necessary, medical treatment.
“Lifestyle adjustments like improving sleep, reducing stress, losing weight, and increasing physical activity can naturally boost testosterone, particularly in borderline or age-related cases,” Baumgarten noted.
At UAB, men who require testosterone replacement therapy can access a full range of services through the Men’s Health Clinic, which offers various treatment options including injections, gels or creams, subcutaneous pellets, and oral medications.Low Testosterone (Low T)
Dr. Scott Lundy is a Staff Urologist and a Surgical Scientist in the Department of Urology at the Cleveland Clinic. He joins this episode of the Butts and Guts podcast to discuss everything you need to know about low testosterone (also known as "low t"). Listen to learn more about this condition and how to safely seek treatment.
Subscribe: Apple Podcasts | Podcast Addict | Spotify | Buzzsprout
Low Testosterone (Low T)
Podcast Transcript
Dr Scott Steele: Butts and Guts, a Cleveland Clinic podcast exploring your digestive and surgical health from end to end.
Dr Scott Steele: Hi again, everyone, and welcome to another episode of Butts and Guts. I'm your host, Scott Steele, the Chair of Colorectal Surgery here at the Cleveland Clinic in beautiful Cleveland, Ohio. Today, we are going to once again step out of the digestive track and go a little bit under something we haven't talked about before, and that's low testosterone, otherwise known as "low t." And I'm super excited to have Dr. Scott Lundy, who is a Staff Urologist and a Surgical Scientist here at the Cleveland Clinic in Cleveland Clinic's Department of Urology. Scott, welcome to Butts and Guts.
Dr. Scott Lundy: Thanks for having me, Dr. Steele. It's nice to be here.
Dr Scott Steele: So, long-time listeners to this know that I always start off with asking you to tell us a little bit about yourself.
Dr. Scott Lundy: Yeah.
Dr Scott Steele: Tell me a little bit about your background, where you're from, where'd you train, and how did it come to the point that you're here at the Cleveland Clinic?
Dr. Scott Lundy: Great. Yeah, so I was born to an Air Force family. I'm the first person in my family not to go flying. So, I'm a bit of the black sheep, if you will. But, moved around a lot growing up, went to college and became a biomedical engineer, and decided to pursue medicine at that time, and went and did an MD-PhD program in Seattle at the University of Washington. I really enjoyed a lot of my training there, and ultimately settled on the fact that I had to be a surgeon and I had to be a scientist, and so proceeded in that direction and went into urology.
I came to Cleveland for residency at Cleveland Clinic, which is a six-year residency, and then stuck around for one extra year in reproductive urology, which is a field that's dedicated primarily to infertility, vasectomy reversal, microsurgery, low testosterone, and erectile dysfunction. I stayed on here as staff, and I now split my time between time in the research lab, doing basic science research, and also seeing patients and doing surgery. I'm happy to be here and discuss some of these areas that are near and dear to my heart.
Dr Scott Steele: As somebody who spent 17 years of their life in Seattle, welcome into the Midwest from the West side. That place is near and dear to my heart. So, today, we're going to talk a little bit about low testosterone. So, just to start, let's go ahead with a giant overview of that. What is testosterone to our listeners? You can't turn on the television these days and not see some sort of a commercial about it. And what causes someone to experience low levels of testosterone?
Dr. Scott Lundy: Yeah. So, testosterone is actually the primary sex hormone in all men and women. Believe it or not, it's more prevalent in women than estrogen even, but we often think of it as only a male hormone. That being said, it is the primary driver for many of the aspects that make us masculine. It's also important in things like muscle mass, in bone health, supporting mood, and it's really critical in supporting normal erection function and in sex drive. And it does this through a variety of various biochemical pathways.
Testosterone starts off actually quite high. When people are born, there's a "mini puberty" that occurs right after birth, and then that subsides for many years and things go quiet until puberty happens. And then there's another raging storm of testosterone that occurs in young men. As that number goes up, sex drive goes up, erections come about, and then that number stays high for many years. But then as men age and get older, that number dwindles, the testosterone levels fall. Other things can also cause this to fall, things like diabetes, for example, obesity, regular use of opioid pain medications. Chronic stress has a role in decreasing testosterone levels. And there are other things as well, like sleep apnea, or rarely things like brain masses that can cause decreased testosterone. But the things that we see often act in concert together to drop testosterone levels. And in some men, this causes them to have symptoms.
Dr Scott Steele: Yeah. That's a great segue, if you will, into - I know you spoke a little bit about it, about what it does, and I'm assuming it's the opposite. But just kind of clarify a little bit - what are the symptoms of low testosterone and maybe even a little bit more than that? Almost I always think about things in colorectal surgery world. When are these symptoms something that I would say, "Hey, I need to go talk to my doctor about it," versus, "Eh, it's a process of I'm just getting older"?
Dr. Scott Lundy: Yeah, that's a great question. So, many of the symptoms associated with low testosterone are general symptoms. So, things like fatigue, lots of people are tired for a variety of reasons, but low testosterone is one of them. Other things like low sex drive are a really common side effect of having low testosterone, or erection problems. But as we said, many of these symptoms can come from multiple sources, and so it's really a judgment call, or a clinical decision, on whether the testosterone itself is an important aspect of that symptom. Other things like decreased lean muscle mass can come up. Decreased cognition has been reported to be a symptom of low testosterone, and depressed mood or mood swings can also be a role particularly in men who are actually being treated to artificially decrease their testosterone for prostate cancer, for example.
Dr Scott Steele: So, talking about just in general what's considered a low testosterone level, if you could kind of talk about that. And then secondly, let's just say I'm a 50-year-old male, is this a normal lab that people are getting? Or do I need to specifically talk to my doctor about, "Hey, can you check my testosterone," and should they?
Dr. Scott Lundy: So, a testosterone check is never a bad idea. It's typically done in the morning before 10:00 AM so that we can maintain consistent checks at consistent times because the value does fluctuate throughout the day. Normal men have testosterone levels between 400 to 1,000, is what's considered the typical normal range. And for our guidelines, we follow anything below 300 as considered to be abnormal. And that needs to be documented on two separate tests or blood tests, which can be done in almost any major lab. It doesn't have to be a specialized lab, and it's a fairly fast and easy to run test.
There is some data that suggests that as we age, testosterone drops and we should be using, as a result, an age discriminatory number for testosterone levels. But at present, the guidelines simply state 300 is the correct number, and any men below 300 on repeat labs can be considered for testosterone. But men above that, even with symptoms, are typically not good candidates because the degree of low testosterone is not commensurate with their symptoms, and we need to be looking at other causes.
Now, as far as age, what you mentioned, there are cutoffs that depend on how old you are. But also as managed, the levels simply do drop, and that is almost unavoidable to a degree.
Dr Scott Steele: Truth or myth: Less than 10 percent of people assigned male at birth that are aged 50 to 79 years old have low testosterone.
Dr. Scott Lundy: Myth. The number is actually much higher. So, men over the age of 45, about one-third are considered to be hypogonadal according to this definition, and that number increases to almost half of men over age 75.
Dr Scott Steele: So, as we know, being overweight has a lot of different health impacts. So can weight loss or many other lifestyle changes, diet changes, exercise, help address low testosterone?
Dr. Scott Lundy: Absolutely. Weight loss and vigorous exercise both have a significant impact on testosterone levels, and there's many reasons for that. But one of the primary reasons is that the extra body mass that we often have is adipose tissue, and this contains an enzyme called aromatase. And aromatase turns testosterone into estrogen, and so it decreases the testosterone levels. So, if you decrease the amount of that tissue, you actually decrease the loss of testosterone to estrogen, and your testosterone levels will go up. And similarly, if you lose weight and vigorously exercise, this promotes increased testosterone through other pathways, as well.
Other things like sleep apnea for example, play a large role in these processes, and men who have sleep apnea have decreased testosterone, and that's often related to their weight. Increasing their exercise and improving their diet can improve sleep apnea, which can improve their overall sleep, their overall health, and their testosterone levels.
Dr Scott Steele: You mentioned earlier that some of the symptoms are a little bit vague. So, with that in mind, when should - I'm a listener to this podcast, I'm listening to you, I'm like, "I got low T, I'm telling you I do." But realistically, when should they go ahead and see my health care provider about this?
Dr. Scott Lundy: Yeah. I think it's an individualized decision. But if you're a man who's experiencing erectile problems and that's bothersome to you, or if you're having low sex drive, to me, those are two pretty specific things that would suggest a testosterone level should be checked. Other things like fatigue, it's perfectly appropriate to check, but it does need to be checked by someone who has some knowledge about what time of day to check it and how to interpret it. Because if your levels are 350 to 375, that may look like it's on the lower end of the spectrum, but it's probably not causing your problems. And that's where the trained health care professionals that you trust can come in and provide guidance.
Dr Scott Steele: So, as we talked about before, there's a lot of different advertisements and things on the radio and TV everywhere that talk about you got Low T, there's clinics for it that you can kind of be able to go to. But let's switch gears and talk about actual hormones or testosterone replacement therapy. So, can you talk a little bit about that? What's the goal of it? What are the risks? And who is eligible to receive it?
Dr. Scott Lundy: Sure. So, testosterone therapy in general is a group of treatments that we can offer to men who have documented low testosterone. And the goal of that treatment, present, is to improve the symptoms and their quality of life. There is some evidence to suggest that low testosterone can cause long-term health problems, but we still don't know well enough to use that as evidence to suggest that any man with low testosterone should be treated. But rather, if a man is symptomatic and has low levels, we should consider therapy. And then, by proxy, if the therapy doesn't help those symptoms, then we're obligated to stop the treatment, as well, because it didn't improve the symptoms that we were targeting.
Some men are good candidates for testosterone therapy, and some men are not. Men with advanced prostate cancer, for example, should probably not be treated with testosterone as this can worsen their prostate cancer. Men with a recent heart attack or stroke may not be good candidates in the short term for treatment as well.
When we actually talk about types of treatments, there are many that are available, but the three most common that we talk about are either injections that are administered by the patient, themselves, once a week or every other week. Patients can also apply gel to their shoulders and chest once a day to improve the levels of testosterone, or they can go to their providers and have pellets placed under their skin every few months. And that's called TESTOPEL, which is a third option for men to have testosterone therapy.
There are even other medications that we can use that are oral pills, that are designed to increase testosterone through other means. And those are appropriate for men who, for example, want to have a child and don't want to have infertility because the traditional testosterone therapies will block sperm production. So, any men who meets those criteria and is interested is a good candidate to discuss this therapy with their provider.
Dr Scott Steele: So, I got to ask, you'll see a lot of these advertisements about low testosterone and some of these precursors that will boost testosterone levels available to your local nutrition store. Do these things really work?
Dr. Scott Lundy: So, unfortunately, many of these supplements that are available contain compounds that are not safe, and that may raise testosterone levels in unsafe ways, even by containing testosterone itself. Many of them also contain small levels of medications like Viagra or sildenafil. So, for the most part, we shy away from using these supplements that are obtained from sources that can't be verified or validated. This is also even more complicated when we include some of the specialized men's health clinics that are available in some markets or online providers. And I think it's important for patients to do their due diligence and make sure that whoever is prescribing these medications for them is doing so in a safe way. And safe means regular monitoring, safe means physical exam, safe means following the guidelines, and sometimes that happens and sometimes it doesn't.
Dr Scott Steele: So, are there any advancements on the horizon when it comes to treatment for low T?
Dr. Scott Lundy: Yeah, there's actually a number of things coming soon. We're really excited because there's a big trial coming that should be reported this year or next year that really delves into whether or not there's an increased risk for heart attack and stroke on men who receive testosterone therapy. Because to present, we don't actually know the answer to that question to the fullest extent. So that trial is concluding now, and we should have results soon, and we're really excited about that.
In terms of the nuts and bolts of actual therapy, there are two things that are now on the horizon or newly available that are useful. The first is called Natesto, which is an intranasal spray that you can use up to three times a day to increase testosterone. And this does so without needles or pokes or anything like that. And it can, in some cases, actually preserve fertility and sperm production, too. So, it's a good option for younger men who want to have a family in the near future.
We also have oral testosterone therapy coming. There was an oral testosterone therapy many years ago, but it caused liver damage. So, we're excited about the new formulation that doesn't seem to have that as a side effect, although this is still in the early stages and we're awaiting more results about its safety and efficacy. So, stay tuned.
Dr Scott Steele: So now it's time for our quick hitters, where we get to know you a little bit better. So, first of all, what's your favorite sport to either watch or play?
Dr. Scott Lundy: My favorite sport to watch is Formula 1 racing, and my favorite sport to participate in is skiing.
Dr Scott Steele: Fantastic. Downhill, or cross-country, or water?
Dr. Scott Lundy: Downhill. And then I'll piggyback on that and say my favorite semi-sport is underwater diving and underwater photography.
Dr Scott Steele: Fantastic. We've had a couple of people like that. So, what is your favorite meal?
Dr. Scott Lundy: I love a good authentic Neapolitan pizza.
Dr Scott Steele: And give me a place that you've either been to or you want to go to that you like to the audience.
Dr. Scott Lundy: Yeah. So, I lived in Florence, Italy for a while during my PhD, and there's a restaurant there called Il Purgatorio. “It's Purgatory.” So, Purgatory I would say is my favorite place.
Dr Scott Steele: Fantastic. And finally, tell us something that you like about here in Northeast Ohio.
Dr. Scott Lundy: I absolutely love that I can walk out my house, hop in my car, and within five minutes be in a national park with my kids, hiking around, seeing nature. It's just an incredibly fantastic place to raise a family.
Dr Scott Steele: That's great. So, give us a final take-home message for our listeners.
Dr. Scott Lundy: Yeah. I think testosterone carries with it a lot of connotations, both good and bad. I think it's a necessary part of what makes us humans and men. And I think treatment for low testosterone in the appropriate patient has a lot of benefits if done safely, but it really does need to be prescribed by someone who has expertise and prescribed to a patient who has the willingness to follow the regimen and stay safe.
Dr Scott Steele: Well, that's super. So, for more information about men's health here at the Cleveland Clinic, please visit clevelandclinic.org/menshealth. That's clevelandclinic.org/menshealth. You can also call the Department of Urology on 216-444-5600. That's 216-444-5600. Scott, you got a great first name, and thanks so much for joining us on Butts and Guts.
Dr. Scott Lundy: Thanks. I appreciate your time.
Dr Scott Steele: That wraps things up here at Cleveland Clinic. Until next time, thanks for listening to Butts and Guts.Locations:
AdvertisementAdvertisement
Low testosterone (male hypogonadism) is a condition in which your testicles don’t produce enough testosterone. It has several possible causes, including conditions or injuries affecting your testicles, pituitary gland or hypothalamus. It’s treatable with testosterone replacement therapy.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services. Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Low testosterone (male hypogonadism) is a condition in which your testicles don’t produce enough testosterone (the male sex hormone). More specifically, the Leydig cells in your testicles make testosterone.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services. Policy
Low testosterone causes different symptoms at different ages. Testosterone levels in adults naturally decline with age.
Other names for low testosterone and male hypogonadism include:
- Testosterone deficiency syndrome.
- Testosterone deficiency.
- Primary hypogonadism.
- Secondary hypogonadism.
- Hypergonadotropic hypogonadism.
- Hypogonadotropic hypogonadism.
Testosterone is the main androgen. It stimulates the development of male characteristics and is essential for sperm production (spermatogenesis). Levels of testosterone are naturally much higher in men than women.
In men, testosterone helps maintain and develop:
- Sex organs and genitalia.
- Muscle mass.
- Adequate levels of red blood cells.
- Bone density.
- Sense of well-being.
- Sexual and reproductive function.
Your body usually tightly controls the levels of testosterone in your blood. Levels are typically highest in the morning and decline through the day.
Your hypothalamus and pituitary gland normally control the amount of testosterone your testicles produce and release.
Your hypothalamus releases gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH), which triggers your pituitary gland to release luteinizing hormone (LH). LH then travels to your gonads (testicles or ovaries) and stimulates the production and release of testosterone. Your pituitary also releases follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) to cause sperm production.
Advertisement
Any issue with your testicles, hypothalamus or pituitary gland can cause low testosterone (male hypogonadism).
The American Urology Association (AUA) considers low blood testosterone to be less than 300 nanograms per deciliter (ng/dL) for adults.
However, some researchers and healthcare providers disagree with this and feel that levels below 250 ng/dL are low. Providers also take symptoms into consideration when diagnosing low testosterone.
Male hypogonadism is a medical condition that can affect people with testicles at any age from birth through adulthood.
Low testosterone is more likely to affect people who:
- Are older.
- Have obesity.
- Have poorly managed Type 2 diabetes.
- Have obstructive sleep apnea.
- Have chronic medical conditions, such as kidney dysfunction or cirrhosis of the liver.
- Have HIV/AIDs.
It’s difficult for researchers to estimate how common low testosterone is since different studies have different definitions for low testosterone.
Data suggest that about 2% of men may have low testosterone. And other studies have estimated that more than 8% of men aged 50 to 79 years have low testosterone.
Symptoms of low testosterone can vary considerably, particularly by age.
Symptoms that highly suggest low testosterone in men include:
- Reduced sex drive.
- Erectile dysfunction.
- Loss of armpit and pubic hair.
- Shrinking testicles.
- Hot flashes.
- Low or zero sperm count (azoospermia), which causes male infertility.
Other symptoms of low testosterone in men include:
- Depressed mood.
- Difficulties with concentration and memory.
- Increased body fat.
- Enlarged male breast tissue (gynecomastia).
- Decrease in muscle strength and mass.
- Decrease in endurance.
Low testosterone before or during puberty for boys:
- Slowed growth in height, but their arms and legs may continue to grow out of proportion with the rest of their body.
- Reduced development of pubic hair.
- Reduced growth of their penis and testicles.
- Less voice deepening.
- Lower-than-normal strength and endurance.
There are several possible causes of low testosterone. The two types of male hypogonadism are:
- Primary hypogonadism (testicular disorder).
- Secondary hypogonadism (pituitary/hypothalamus dysfunction).
Causes of primary and secondary hypogonadism are also divided into either congenital (at birth) or acquired (developed later in childhood or adulthood).
Primary hypogonadism happens when something is wrong with your testicles that doesn’t allow them to make normal levels of testosterone.
Another name for primary hypogonadism is hypergonadotropic hypogonadism. In this type, your pituitary gland produces more luteinizing hormone (LH) and follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) (known as gonadotropins) in response to low testosterone levels. The high levels of these hormones would normally tell your testicles to produce more testosterone and sperm. However, if you have damaged (most commonly related to prior chemotherapy) or missing testicles, they can’t respond to the increased levels of gonadotropins. As a result, your testicles make too little or no testosterone and sperm.
Advertisement
Sometimes in primary hypogonadism testosterone levels are within the normal range and gonadotropins are high. Your specialist will help you understand if you need treatment, even with normal testosterone levels.
Congenital conditions that affect your testicles and can lead to primary hypogonadism include:
- Absence of testicles at birth (anorchia).
- Undescended testicles (cryptorchidism).
- Leydig cell hypoplasia (underdevelopment of Leydig cells in your testicles).
- Klinefelter’s syndrome (a genetic condition in which males are born with an extra X chromosome: XXY instead of XY).
- Noonan syndrome (a rare genetic condition that can cause delayed puberty, undescended testicles or infertility).
- Myotonic dystrophy (part of a group of inherited disorders called muscular dystrophies).
Acquired conditions that affect your testicles and can lead to primary hypogonadism include:
- Testicle injury or removal.
- Orchitis, which is inflammation of one or both testicles. This is most often the result of a bacterial infection, such as a sexually transmitted infection, but it can be due to viral infections, such as mumps.
- Chemotherapy or radiation therapy to your testicles.
- Certain types of tumors.
- Anabolic steroid use.
Advertisement
Conditions that affect how your hypothalamus and/or pituitary gland cause secondary hypogonadism. This is known as hypogonadotropic hypogonadism because there are low levels of luteinizing hormone (LH) and follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH). Those low levels cause decreased testosterone and sperm production.
Congenital conditions that can lead to secondary hypogonadism include:
- Isolated hypogonadotropic hypogonadism (a condition that causes low levels of gonadotropin-releasing hormone from birth).
- Kallmann syndrome (a rare genetic condition that causes loss of the development of nerve cells in your hypothalamus that produce gonadotrophin-releasing hormone. It can also cause a lack of smell.).
- Prader-Willi syndrome (a rare genetic multisystem disorder than can cause hypothalamus dysfunction).
Acquired conditions that can lead to secondary hypogonadism include:
- Hypopituitarism (This condition may result from an adenoma, infiltrative disease, infection, injury, radiation therapy or surgery that affects your pituitary gland.).
- Hyperprolactinemia.
- Iron overload (hemochromatosis).
- Brain or head injury.
- Cushing’s syndrome.
- Cirrhosis of the liver.
- Kidney failure.
- HIV/AIDS.
- Alcohol use disorder.
- Poorly managed diabetes.
- Obesity.
- Obstructive sleep apnea.
- Certain medications, including estrogens, psychoactive drugs, metoclopramide, opioids, leuprolide, goserelin, triptorelin and newer androgen biosynthesis inhibitors for prostate cancer.
Advertisement
Late-onset hypogonadism (LOH) is a type of secondary male hypogonadism that results from normal aging. As males age they have a deterioration of hypothalamic-pituitary function and Leydig cell function that decrease testosterone and/or sperm production.
LOH and low testosterone are more common in men who have Type 2 diabetes, overweight and/or obesity.
In one study, 30% of men who were overweight had low testosterone, compared to only 6% of those with weight in the normal range. In another study, 25% of men with Type 2 diabetes had low testosterone, compared to 13% of those without diabetes.
If you have signs and symptoms of low testosterone, a healthcare provider will perform a physical exam. They’ll also ask questions about your medical history, medications you take or have taken, smoking history and any symptoms you currently have. Blood tests may be ordered.
To make a diagnosis, a provider will consider your specific signs, symptoms and any blood test results.
The following tests can help confirm low testosterone and determine the cause:
- Total testosterone level blood test: This test usually requires two sample collections between 8 a.m. and 10 a.m., when testosterone levels should be at their highest. If you’re sick or have recently been sick, it’s important to tell your provider. Acute illness may cause a falsely low result.
- Luteinizing hormone (LH) blood test: This test can help determine if the cause of low testosterone is an issue with your pituitary gland.
- Prolactin blood test: High prolactin levels may be a sign of pituitary gland issues or tumors.
Healthcare providers treat low testosterone (male hypogonadism) with testosterone replacement therapy. Testosterone replacement therapy has several different forms, including:
- Testosterone skin gels: You apply the gel every day to clean, dry skin as directed. It’s important that you don’t transfer the gel to another person through skin-to-skin contact. Testosterone skin gels are one of the most common forms of treatment in the U.S.
- Intramuscular testosterone injections: You or a provider can administer the injections into a muscle every 1 to 2 weeks. Providers can administer long-acting testosterone by injection every 10 weeks. There are also subcutaneous injection options.
- Testosterone patches: You apply these patches every day to your skin as directed. You usually have to rotate their location to avoid skin reactions.
- Testosterone pellets: A specialist implants these pellets under your skin every three to six months. The pellets provide consistent and long-term testosterone dosages.
- Buccal testosterone tablets: These are sticky pills that you apply to your gums twice a day. The testosterone absorbs quickly into your bloodstream through your gums.
- Testosterone nasal gel: You apply a testosterone gel by applying it into each nostril three times a day.
- Oral testosterone: A pill form of testosterone called undecanoate is available for people with low testosterone due to specific medical conditions, such as Klinefelter syndrome or tumors that have damaged their pituitary gland.
You may not be able to receive testosterone replacement therapy if you have a history of the following:
- Prostate cancer.
- An unevaluated lump on your prostate. Everyone considering testosterone replacement therapy must undergo prostate screening before starting this therapy.
- Breast cancer.
- Uncontrolled heart failure.
- Untreated obstructive sleep apnea.
The side effects of testosterone replacement therapy include:
- Acne or oily skin.
- Swelling in your ankles caused by mild fluid retention.
- Stimulation of the prostate, which can cause urinary symptoms such as difficulty peeing.
- Breast enlargement or tenderness.
- Worsening of sleep apnea.
- Smaller testicles.
- Skin irritation (if you use topical testosterone replacement).
Laboratory abnormalities that can occur with testosterone replacement therapy include:
- Increase in prostate-specific antigen (PSA).
- Increase in red blood cell count.
- Decrease in sperm count, producing infertility (inability to have children), which is especially important in younger people who want to have biological children.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
There’s no one-time fix for low testosterone. However, consistent hormone replacement therapy helps improve sex drive, ease symptoms of depression and increase energy levels for those experiencing low testosterone. Treatment may also boost muscle mass and bone density.
The mortality of men with testosterone deficiency is significantly higher than among men with normal testosterone levels. But, it is unclear whether replacing testosterone to a normal level reduces that increased mortality. Treatment is largely focused on the treatment of symptoms, not the specific testosterone level.
For congenital hypogonadism, testosterone replacement therapy often helps prevent problems related to delayed puberty.
Healthcare providers and medical researchers don’t know how to prevent low testosterone from genetic conditions or damage to your testicles, hypothalamus or pituitary gland.
Lifestyle habits that may help keep testosterone levels normal include:
- Eating a healthy diet.
- Exercise.
- Weight management.
- Avoiding excessive use of alcohol and drugs.
If you’re taking hormone replacement therapy, regular follow-up appointments with a healthcare provider are important.
If you’re experiencing symptoms of low testosterone, such as a decrease in sex drive and hot flashes, talk to a healthcare provider. They will evaluate you and may order blood tests.
If your child isn’t showing signs of puberty by the age of 14, talk to their pediatrician.
Many people shrug off the symptoms associated with low testosterone as an unpleasant part of getting older. But you should address symptoms that interfere with your quality of life. If you’re noticing bothersome signs of low testosterone, see a provider and discuss your options for treatment.
Have a low sex drive or trouble with erections? Low testosterone might be the cause. Cleveland Clinic’s experts can help balance your hormones.
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 09/02/2022.
Learn more about the Health Library and our editorial process.
AdvertisementAdvertisement
Ad
Rendered: Sun Oct 19 2025 04:21:24 GMT+0000 (Coordinated Universal Time)Low Testosterone
Find your care
We provide men’s health care in one convenient clinic. To learn more about our services, call 310-794-7700.
The Men’s Clinic at UCLA - Low Testosterone / Hypogonadism
What is Low Testosterone?
In the U.S. today, it’s estimated that more than fifteen million adult men have low testosterone, also known as hypogonadism or low lobido. Symptoms of this condition include loss of libido, diminished frequency and quality of erections, decreased enjoyment of life, decreased ability to concentrate and decreased sports performance. Testosterone deficiency is highly associated with multiple disease states including obesity, diabetes, hypertension, high cholesterol and asthma. Hypogonadism is also seen in men taking chronic narcotics, men with chronic pain and men with a history of head trauma.
Low Testosterone / Hypogonadism: Diagnosis
Low testosterone is diagnosed through a blood test where physicians look for the level of testosterone, free testosterone, sex hormone binding globulin (SHBG,) and pituitary hormones important in male hormone production.
Low Testosterone / Hypogonadism: Treatment
Testosterone replacement therapy (TRT) can be administered in many forms. Most patients will begin their treatment process with transdermal (TD) application routes. The most common form is a gel that is applied to clean, dry skin every day at the same time, usually after a man gets out of the shower. TD application is easy, well-tolerated and allows for excellent absorption of testosterone and an even delivery of the hormone throughout the day. There are minimal side effects. Some men will have a mild skin irritation while others may see an increase in their hematocrit, which will then need to be monitored. Men on TD therapy do need to be careful not to have skin to skin contact with other individuals until the application site is washed. Most products absorb after 2 hours of skin contact so washing the area after 2 hours provides the safest way to avoid transmission of active testosterone to others.
Once starting TRT, patients should notice improved energy levels, exercise tolerance, libido and erectile function within the first few weeks of therapy. Long term results may include weight loss, especially when combined with a vigorous exercise and nutrition regimen. Optimal results will be achieved within about three to six months. Periodic symptom and blood monitoring is essential to good therapeutic response. Once your UCLA Men’s Clinic physician has you on a stable dosing regimen, he or she will check bloodwork every 6 months or so to ensure safety.
Injection therapy is another effective option. There is a lot of flexibility with injection therapy as your physician can alter the dose and schedule of injections to maximize your testosterone levels. It is a very effective therapy, but it does require the patient or patient’s partner to learn how to inject or make frequent office visits.
Scheduling an Appointment
Board-certified urologists staff The Men’s Clinic at UCLA and you can be assured you are getting an experienced physician performing your evaluation and treatment in a relaxed and comfortable environment. For more information and to schedule an appointment, please call the UCLA Urology Appointment line at 310-794-7700.Testosterone is the primary sex hormone in men. And according to a recent study, a lack of it could contribute to premature death. Although women reach menopause, a time in their forties and fifties when the production of the hormone estrogen plummets, middle-age men don’t see a major, sudden decrease in their bodies’ production of testosterone.
But new research published in the journal Archives of Internal Medicine indicates men with low testosterone levels appear to have a higher risk of dying than men who have normal testosterone levels. Levels of testosterone gradually go down in all men as they age, but generally only on the order of one-point-five percent a year after age thirty. Low testosterone is commonly known to cause a drop in sex drive, as well as bone strength and muscle mass.
Researchers studied eight-hundred-fifty-eight male veterans, and revealed that men with low testosterone were sixty-eight percent more likely to have died during the study’s almost four-and-a-half-year follow-up than subjects who had varying levels that were within normal bounds.
The paper concluded that heightened mortality in men with low testosterone was not due to acute illness, but subtler, underlying factors.
While testosterone levels sometimes dip as a result of obesity or inactivity, doctors may recommend hormone replacement for men whose low levels are caused by other factors. Hormone replacement, while not proven to reduce mortality risk, may be warranted if they don’t have conditions… such as prostate cancer or other serious illnesses… that preclude the therapy.As men age, their testosterone levels may drop.
The correct answer is fact. Testosterone levels may drop over time as a man ages. This drop is normal and many men don't even notice it. But if levels get too low, some symptoms may develop. See your doctor if you notice changes in your mood or sex drive.
Which physical change could be a sign of low testosterone?
The correct answer is swollen breasts. Men with low testosterone also may lose body hair and muscle mass. Their testicles may shrink. See your doctor if you notice any of these changes in your body.
It is normal for older men to lose all interest in sex.
The correct answer is myth. It is normal for older men to have less interest in sex compared to when they were younger. But it is not normal to lose all interest in sex. This could be a sign of low testosterone levels. Tell your doctor if you have lost interest in sex. Treatment may help.
Low testosterone can cause trouble getting an erection.
The correct answer is fact. Low testosterone can make it difficult to get or keep an erection. It can also lead to low sperm counts. Erection problems are also called erectile dysfunction, or ED. Health problems, such as high blood pressure, and many medications can also cause ED. See your doctor to find out what may be causing ED.
Which emotional change could be a sign of low testosterone?
The correct answer is all of the above. Some men also have hot flashes as testosterone levels drop. Emotional changes can make it hard to work, sleep, or do things you enjoy. Be sure you talk with your doctor if these symptoms occur.
A simple blood test can detect low testosterone.
The correct answer is fact. If you have ED, have lost interest in sex, or have other symptoms such as swollen breasts, your doctor may check for low testosterone. To do the test, your doctor will draw a sample of blood. Sometimes, more than one blood test is needed to accurately diagnose low testosterone.
Aging is the only cause of low testosterone.
The correct answer is false. Some medications, some cancers, problems with genes, injury to the testicles and other health problems can cause low testosterone. Your doctor can do tests to find out what is causing low testosterone.
Low testosterone can make a man's bones weaker.
The correct answer is fact. Low testosterone can lead to osteoporosis, a condition that causes thinner bones that may break more easily. If you have low testosterone, your doctor may recommend a bone density test to see if you have osteoporosis.
Testosterone therapy can help:
The correct answer is all of the above. Testosterone therapy means taking testosterone to bring levels closer to normal. This can reduce the changes caused by low testosterone, but not everyone responds to testosterone therapy.
Testosterone therapy is a good idea for all older men.
The correct answer is myth. Some men don't need treatment for low testosterone because they don't have symptoms. Testosterone therapy isn't a good idea for healthy older men who don't have low testosterone. It may increase the risk of prostate cancer. Your doctor can help you decide if testosterone therapy is right for you.Low testosterone is also called male hypogonadism. It is a condition where your testicles don’t produce enough of the male hormone testosterone. Testosterone plays a role in the development of male features. These include muscular strength, facial hair and a deeper voice. Testosterone also contributes to sex drive and the growth of male sex organs.
Testosterone naturally decreases with age. But, low testosterone can impact males at any point. This condition can also impact males who have:
- Chronic medical conditions
- HIV/AIDS
- Obesity
- Obstructive sleep apnea
- Poorly managed Type 2 diabetes
Symptoms of Low Testosterone
Low testosterone affects everyone differently. Specific symptoms linked to this condition include:
- Decreased endurance/energy
- Depression
- Fatigue
- Loss of body hair
- Loss of lean muscle mass
- Low sperm count
- Overweight or obesity
- Poor erection quality
- Reduced sex drive
- Shrinking testicles
- Thinning beard hairLow testosterone can leave you feeling tired. You may not have enough energy for your favorite activities. If that’s the case, medical treatment can help you feel better. The expert urologists at Emory Healthcare offer testosterone replacement therapy to boost your testosterone levels. We’ll work with you to find the best way to deliver this treatment.
Low Testosterone Treatments
Your Partner in Low Testosterone Treatment
Testosterone Replacement to Treat Low Testosterone
Testosterone replacement therapy is the most common low testosterone treatment method. Our urologists can provide this therapy in several ways:
- Gel
- Injection
- Patch
- Pellet
You will need blood tests before and during treatment. These tests will track the changes in your testosterone levels.
Benefits of Low Testosterone Therapy
After you start low testosterone therapy, you may feel several positive changes. Treatment can lead to improvements in your:
- Energy
- Erection quality
- Memory
- Muscle Mass
- Sex drive
Testing and Monitoring
While on testosterone therapy, you will need periodic testing to monitor your blood counts, liver function, and PSA to evaluate your risk for prostate cancer.
Prostate Cancer and Low Testosterone Treatment
If you have prostate cancer, you should have a careful discussion with your urologist before deciding on testosterone replacement. You should also avoid this therapy if you’re waiting on a prostate cancer diagnosis.
Find an Emory Doctor
24Emory Healthcare doctors provide specialized treatment and research the latest advancements.
View Emory Physician ProfilesExplore our Network
To expand your options, explore our network of providers throughout Atlanta and the surrounding counties.
Make an Appointment with Emory Urology
Create a MyChart account to schedule online or call 404-778-4898 to schedule an appointment.
* View our call center hours
Please visit our privacy policy for more information.New research finds that more men have suboptimal testosterone levels than previously known, and it may be putting these men at risk.
1:00 PM
Author |
A male's total testosterone level may be linked to more than just sexual health and muscle mass preservation, a new study finds. Low amounts of the hormone could also be associated with chronic disease, even among men 40 years of age and younger.
MORE FROM THE LAB: Subscribe to our weekly newsletter
"If we look at data for men from a population level, it has become evident over time that chronic disease is on the rise in older males," says Mark Peterson, Ph.D., M.S., FACSM, lead author of the study and assistant professor of physical medicine and rehabilitation at Michigan Medicine. "But we're also finding that a consequence of being obese and physically inactive is that men are seeing declines in testosterone even at younger ages."
Published in Scientific Reports, Peterson and colleagues studied this relationship among testosterone, age and chronic disease.
"Previous research in the field has shown that total testosterone deficiency in men increases with age, and studies have shown that testosterone deficiency is also associated with obesity-related chronic diseases," Peterson says. "But it hasn't been previously understood what the optimal levels of total testosterone should be in men at varying ages, and to what effect those varying levels of the hormone have on disease risk across the life span."
The study's basis came from previous work from other researchers that appeared to define normal ranges of testosterone but didn't use population-representative cohorts, he says.
"Previous studies used clinical cohorts that were not reflective of the current male population in the United States," Peterson says. "The cohorts they used enforced strict guidelines for patients that were accepted into the cohort. Therefore, those patients tended to be much healthier."
Peterson and colleagues, then, leveraged a population sample that was much more representative of males in the United States today.
A lot of men may not be aware of the risk factors for testosterone deficiency because of their current lifestyle. And more importantly, that declining levels could be contributing to a silent decline in overall health...Mark Peterson, Ph.D., M.S., FACSM
Multimorbidity across age groups
Using data from the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey, the research team examined the extent to which hypogonadism is prevalent among men of all ages.
Of the 2,399 men in the survey who were at least 20 years old, 2,161 had complete information on demographics (e.g., age, ethnicity and household income), chronic disease diagnoses, blood samples obtained for total testosterone, grip strength and lab results for cardiometabolic disease risk factors.
Peterson and team then examined prevalence of nine chronic conditions, including type 2 diabetes, arthritis, cardiovascular disease, stroke, pulmonary disease, high triglycerides, hypercholesterolemia, hypertension and clinical depression.
SEE ALSO: Weak Grip a Strong Predictor of Metabolic Disease and Disability in Adults
The researchers studied the prevalence of multimorbidity, or when two or more of the chronic conditions were present, among three age groups (young, middle-aged and older men) with and without testosterone deficiency. They found that low total testosterone was associated with multimorbidity in all age groups — but it was more prevalent among young and older men with testosterone deficiency.
"We also found a large dose-response relationship between the age-specific low total testosterone and moderate total testosterone levels and multimorbidity, even after adjusting for obesity and muscle strength capacity," Peterson says. "Which means that men should be concerned about declining total testosterone, even if it has not reached a level to warrant a clinical diagnosis (
Co-author Aleksandr Belakovskiy, M.D., a resident in family medicine at Michigan Medicine, who helped to design and carry out the study, notes that the results show the need for further testing and research.
"This study showed a robust association between testosterone and multiple medical morbidities that could influence the way we think about testosterone in general practice," Belakovskiy says. "While these findings cannot prove causation, it does spark the need for better clinical awareness and more research."
The team hopes the study and its results can serve as a public service announcement for men.
"A lot of men may not be aware of the risk factors for testosterone deficiency because of their current lifestyle," Peterson says. "And more importantly, that declining levels could be contributing to a silent decline in overall health and increased risk for chronic disease."
Explore a variety of health care news & stories by visiting the Health Lab home page for more articles.
Department of Communication at Michigan Medicine
Want top health & research news weekly? Sign up for Health Lab’s newsletters today!Male Hormone Disorders
The endocrinologists at Mount Sinai are experts in diagnosing and treating male hormonal disorders. The most common condition is hypogonadism, also known as “low testosterone” or “low T”.
Men with low testosterone often suffer from low desire, fatigue, depression, poor mental focus, inability to maintain muscle mass, gynecomastia (breast growth), infertility and erectile dysfunction.
When a man is evaluated for low testosterone, his testosterone level should be drawn at 8am after a good night’s sleep. Otherwise, there is a risk of misdiagnosis and years of unnecessary treatment.
It is important to investigate whether there is an underlying cause for hypogonadism, before starting treatment. Once testosterone therapy is started, the treatment may complicate the diagnosis. Possible causes for low testosterone are:
- Obesity
- Uncontrolled diabetes
- Sleep apnea
- Chromosomal abnormalities (such as Klinefelter disease)
- Other hormonal conditions, such as prolactinoma or thyroid disease
- HIV/AIDS
- Certain medications
- Eating disorders and many others.
Rather than simply prescribing testosterone, our endocrinologists aim to address the underlying cause. For instance, researchers at Mount Sinai have found that many obese men with low testosterone undergoing weight loss surgery greatly improve testosterone and erectile function.
Our specialists also work with urologists and reproductive endocrinologists to help men struggling with infertility. Mount Sinai’s experts in male hormonal conditions will prescribe the appropriate treatment to address the underlying condition or recommend medications that raise testosterone levels, while monitoring for side effects and treatment progress.Guidelines
Sexual and Reproductive Health
Want to read the guideline in your own time? Download the PDF
Download full guideline
Looking for a quick overview? Check the pocket guidelines.
Download pocket guidelines
Full text guideline
Summary of Changes
Publications & Appendices
Panel
Related content
No results found
Introduction
Methodology
Male Hypogonadism
Epidemiology And Prevalence Of Sexual Dysfunction And Disorders Of Male Reproductive Health
Management Of Erectile Dysfunction
Disorders Of Ejaculation
Low Sexual Desire And Male Hypoactive Sexual Desire Disorder
Penile Curvature
Penile Size Abnormalities And Dysmorphophobia
Priapism
Male Infertility
Late Effects Survivorship And Mens Health
References
Conflict Of Interest
Citation Information
Copyright And Terms Of Use
3. Male Hypogonadism
Not found
Sorry, this guideline chapter could not be found.
Ask EAU Guidelines BotDiagnosis
Finding male hypogonadism in childhood can help prevent problems from delayed puberty. Early diagnosis and treatment in men helps protect against osteoporosis and other conditions.
A member of your healthcare team does a physical exam and looks at your sexual maturing. This is to see if your pubic hair, your muscle mass and the size of your testes are typical for your age.
Blood tests can show testosterone levels. Testosterone levels are most often highest in the morning. So blood testing is usually done between 8 and 10 a.m. It might be done on more than one day.
If tests show low testosterone, further testing can help find the cause. These studies might include:
- Pituitary hormone testing.
- Semen analysis.
- Pituitary imaging.
- Gene studies.
Treatment
Adults
Testosterone replacement can raise testosterone levels and help ease the symptoms of male hypogonadism. These include less desire for sex, less energy, less facial and body hair, and loss of muscle mass and bone mass.
For older adults who have low testosterone and symptoms of hypogonadism due to aging, it's less clear how well testosterone replacement works.
Anyone taking testosterone replacement should have a medical checkup and blood tests several times during the first year of treatment and yearly after that. This is to see how well the treatment works and to watch for side effects.
Types of testosterone replacement therapy
Testosterone taken by mouth, also called oral, isn't often used for treatment of hypogonadism. Oral testosterone can cause serious liver problems. And it doesn't keep testosterone levels even.
The U.S. Food and Drug Administration has approved one oral testosterone replacement, testosterone undecanoate (Jatenzo, Tlando, Kyzatrex). The lymph system absorbs it, so it might not cause the liver problems seen with other oral forms of testosterone. It's not used to treat hypogonadism caused by aging.
Other forms you might choose can depend on how easy they are to get and use, how much they cost, and whether insurance covers them. They include:
-
Gels. There are several available with different ways of applying them. Depending on the brand, you rub the testosterone into your skin on your upper arm or shoulder (AndroGel, Testim, Vogelxo) or apply it to the front and inner thigh (Fortesta).
The body soaks in testosterone through the skin. Don't shower or bathe for several hours after a using a gel to give it time to soak in.
Side effects include skin irritation and, if someone touches you, having the medicine get on someone else. Don't let your skin touch anyone until the gel is fully dry. Or cover the area after putting on the gel.
-
Shot. Testosterone cypionate (Depo-Testosterone) and testosterone enanthate (Xyosted) are given in a muscle or under the skin. Symptoms might vary between doses depending on how often you get the shots.
You or a family member can learn to give testosterone shots at home. If you're not OK with giving yourself shots, a member of your care team can do it for you.
The shot form of testosterone undecanoate (Aveed) goes deep into a muscle, typically every 10 weeks. A member of your medical team must give it. It can have serious side effects.
- Patch. A patch containing testosterone is put on an arm or the torso each night. Possible side effects are mild or severe skin problems.
-
Gum and cheek, also called buccal cavity. Small and puttylike, gum-and-cheek testosterone replacement sends testosterone through the area above the top teeth where the gum meets the upper lip, called the buccal cavity.
This product, taken three times a day, sticks to the gumline and sends testosterone into the bloodstream. It can irritate the gum.
- Nasal. This testosterone gel (Natesto) can be pumped into the nostrils. This option reduces the risk that medicine will get on someone else through skin contact. This type of testosterone is put into each nostril three times a day. This might make it less easy to use than other methods.
- Pellets put under the skin, called implants. Testosterone-containing pellets (Testopel) are surgically put under the skin every 3 to 6 months.
Testosterone therapy carries risks, including:
- Making too many red blood cells.
- Acne.
- Bigger breasts.
- Sleep problems.
- Growth of the prostate.
- Not making as much sperm.
Risks from testosterone therapy are most often due to doses that are too high. Many of these side effects go away when the dose is lowered. That's why it's so important to have regular follow-up visits with a health care professional, who will monitor the testosterone levels in your blood.
Treatment of infertility due to hypogonadism
If a pituitary problem is the cause, pituitary hormones can be given to help the body make more sperm and restore fertility. A pituitary tumor may need treatment with surgery, medicine, radiation or replacement of other hormones.
There's often no way to help men with primary hypogonadism make sperm. But there are ways to help couples who haven't been able to have children. Assisted reproductive technology offers ways to help.
Treatment for boys
Treatment of delayed puberty in boys depends on the cause. Three to six months of testosterone shots can help start puberty. The testosterone can help increase muscle mass, beard and pubic hair growth, and growth of the penis. This treatment is given only if the bones have matured enough.
Clinical trials
Explore Mayo Clinic studies testing new treatments, interventions and tests as a means to prevent, detect, treat or manage this condition.
Coping and support
Having male hypogonadism can affect how you see yourself. It also can affect your relationships. Talk with a member of your healthcare team about how you can reduce the anxiety and stress that often go with this condition. Counseling might help.
Find out if there are support groups in your area or online. Support groups put you in touch with other people with similar concerns.
Preparing for your appointment
You're likely to start by seeing the person who provides your health care, but you might be referred to someone who specializes in conditions involving the hormone-producing glands, called an endocrinologist.
Here are some tips to help you get ready for your appointment.
What you can do
Make a list of:
- Your symptoms, including any that may seem unrelated to the reason for which you scheduled the appointment, and when they began.
- Key personal information, including any major stresses, recent life changes, and history of childhood illnesses or surgeries.
- All medicines, vitamins or other supplements you take, including doses.
- Questions to ask at your appointment.
For male hypogonadism, some questions to ask include:
- What's the most likely cause of my symptoms?
- Are there other possible causes for my symptoms?
- What tests do I need?
- Is my condition likely to go away or be long-lasting?
- What treatments are there?
- I have other health conditions. How can I best manage them together?
- Are there restrictions I need to follow?
- Where can I find more information?
Be sure to ask all the questions you have about this condition.
What to expect from your doctor
Be prepared to answer questions about your condition, such as:
- Do you have symptoms all the time or do they come and go?
- How bad are your symptoms?
- What, if anything, seems to make your symptoms better?
- What, if anything, seems to make your symptoms worse?
- When did you begin puberty? Did it seem to be earlier or later than others your age?
- Did you have any growth problems as a child or teen?
- Have you hurt your testicles?
- Did you have the mumps as a child or teen? Did you feel pain in your testicles while you had the mumps?
- Did you have testicles that didn't fall into place when you were born?
- Did you have genital surgery or surgery for a groin hernia as a child?
- Do you snore or have disrupted breathing at night?Overview
Male hypogonadism is a condition in which the body doesn't make enough of the hormone testosterone or enough sperm or both. Testosterone plays a key role in male growth and maturing during puberty.
People can be born with male hypogonadism. Or it can start later in life, often from injury or infection. The cause of the condition and when it starts affect what can be done about it. Testosterone replacement therapy can treat some types of male hypogonadism.
Symptoms
Hypogonadism can begin in the womb, before puberty or during adulthood. Symptoms depend on when the condition starts.
In the womb
If a baby's body doesn't make enough testosterone while in the womb, it can affect the outer sex organs. Depending on when hypogonadism starts and how much testosterone there is, a baby whose genes are male may be born with:
- Female genitals.
- Genitals that are neither clearly male nor clearly female, called ambiguous genitals.
- Male genitals that don't develop fully.
Puberty
Male hypogonadism that occurs in the first 10 years of life can delay puberty or cause incomplete or lack of usual development. It can get in the way of:
- Muscle mass growth.
- The voice getting deeper.
- Growth of body and facial hair.
- Growth of the penis and testicles.
And it can cause:
- The arms and legs to grow more than the trunk of the body.
- Growth of breast tissue, called gynecomastia.
Adulthood
In adults, hypogonadism can change certain physical traits and affect the ability to have children. Early symptoms might include:
- Less sex drive.
- Less energy.
- Depression.
Over time, men with hypogonadism can have:
- Difficulty getting and keeping an erection, called erectile dysfunction.
- Problems having children, called infertility.
- Less hair growth on the face and body.
- Less muscle mass.
- Growth of breast tissue, called gynecomastia.
- Loss of bone mass, called osteoporosis.
Severe hypogonadism also can cause mental and emotional changes. As testosterone decreases, some men have symptoms like those of menopause. These can include:
- Trouble focusing.
- Hot flashes.
When to seek help
Make a medical appointment if you have symptoms of male hypogonadism. Finding the cause of hypogonadism is an important first step to getting the right treatment.
Male reproductive system
Causes
Male hypogonadism means the testicles don't make enough of the male sex hormone testosterone. There are two basic types of hypogonadism:
- Primary. This type of hypogonadism comes from a problem in the testicles. It's also called primary testicular failure.
- Secondary. This type of hypogonadism means there's a problem in the parts of the brain that tell the testicles to make testosterone. These parts of the brain are the hypothalamus and the pituitary gland.
The hypothalamus makes gonadotropin-releasing hormone, which signals the pituitary gland to make follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) and luteinizing hormone (LH). Luteinizing hormone then tells the testes to make testosterone.
A trait passed through families, also called inherited, can cause either type of hypogonadism. Something that happens later in life, such as an injury or infection, also can cause either type. This is called acquired hypogonadism. At times, primary and secondary hypogonadism occur together.
Primary hypogonadism
Common causes of primary hypogonadism include:
-
Klinefelter syndrome. This condition results from a problem of the sex chromosomes X and Y. It's present at birth, called congenital. A male typically has one X and one Y chromosome. In Klinefelter syndrome, there are two or more X chromosomes plus one Y chromosome.
The Y chromosome holds the genes that controls the sex of a male child and how the child develops. The extra X chromosome in Klinefelter syndrome causes unusual growth of the testicles. This results in too little testosterone.
-
Testicles that don't move into place, called undescended. Before birth, the testicles develop inside the belly and move down into their place in the scrotum. Sometimes one or both testicles haven't moved into place by birth.
This condition often fixes itself within the first few years of life. If not fixed in early childhood, it can cause the testicles not to work correctly or make enough testosterone.
- Mumps orchitis. A mumps infection as a teenager or as an adult can harm the testicles.
- Hemochromatosis. Too much iron in the blood can cause the testicles to fail or the pituitary gland not to work as it should.
- Injury to the testicles. Because they're outside the belly, the testicles can be injured easily. Harm to both testicles can cause hypogonadism. If one testicle is harmed or removed, the other will take over and make the testosterone that's needed.
-
Cancer treatment. Chemotherapy or radiation therapy to treat cancer can affect how well the body makes testosterone and sperm. The effects of both treatments often are short-lived. But they can cause lifelong inability to have children.
Many men get their fertility back within a few months after treatment. But storing sperm before starting cancer therapy is an option for those who want to have children.
Secondary hypogonadism
In secondary hypogonadism, the testicles look typical but don't work the way they should due to a problem with the pituitary or hypothalamus. Several conditions can cause secondary hypogonadism, including:
- Kallmann syndrome. This is an unusual development of the area of the brain called the hypothalamus, which controls the pituitary hormones. This problem also can affect the ability to smell, called anosmia. And it can cause red-green color blindness.
-
Pituitary conditions. A condition in the pituitary gland can keep hormones from going from the pituitary gland to the testicles. This affects the making of testosterone. A pituitary tumor or other type of brain tumor near the pituitary gland can cause there to be too little of the hormones needed to spur the making of testosterone and sperm.
Also, treatment for a brain tumor, such as surgery or radiation therapy, might affect the pituitary gland and cause hypogonadism.
- Inflammatory disease. Certain diseases that cause the immune system to attack healthy tissue, called inflammatory, can affect the making of testosterone. Examples are sarcoidosis, histiocytosis and tuberculosis.
- HIV/AIDS. HIV/AIDS can cause low levels of testosterone by affecting the hypothalamus, the pituitary and the testes.
- Medicines. The use of certain medicines, such as opiates for pain and some hormones, can affect testosterone levels.
- Obstructive sleep apnea. If untreated, this sleep-related breathing condition can cause hypogonadism. The hypogonadism might improve after sleep apnea treatment.
- Obesity. Being significantly overweight at any age might be linked to hypogonadism.
- Aging. Testosterone levels lessen with age. How fast they go down varies from person to person.
Risk factors
Risk factors for hypogonadism include:
- HIV/AIDS.
- Having had chemotherapy or radiation therapy.
- Aging.
- Obesity.
- Not having a good diet, called malnutrition.
- Obstructive sleep apnea.
Hypogonadism can be passed through families, called inherited. If any of these risk factors are in your family health history, tell a member of your healthcare team.
Complications
The complications of untreated hypogonadism differ depending on whether it starts in the womb, at puberty or in adulthood.
Complications might include:
- Unusual genitals.
- Growth of breast tissue, called gynecomastia.
- Not being able to have children, called infertility.
- Not being able to get or keep an erection, called erectile dysfunction.
- The bone-weakening disease called osteoporosis.
- Poor self-image.Hormone changes are a natural part of aging. But they differ between men and women. In women, reproductive hormones drop dramatically. In men, the drop in hormone levels happens slowly. Here's what you need to know.
Debunking the male menopause myth
The term "male menopause" has been used to describe decreasing testosterone levels related to aging. But aging-related hormone changes differ between women and men. In women, ovulation ends, and hormone production falls over a fairly short amount of time. This is called menopause. In men, the production of testosterone and other hormones goes down over many years.
This gradual fall of testosterone levels is called late-onset hypogonadism. Sometimes it’s called age-related low testosterone. Not everyone with age-related low testosterone has symptoms. Its long-term effects also aren't clear.
Recognizing low testosterone levels
Men’s testosterone levels generally fall about 1% a year after age 40. But most older men still have testosterone levels within the standard range. Only about 10% to 25% of men have levels thought to be low.
Low testosterone levels in older men often go unnoticed. A blood test can check testosterone levels. But tests aren't often done. And many men who have low testosterone levels have no symptoms. Also, the signs and symptoms related to low testosterone aren't specific to low testosterone. A person's age, medicines or other conditions also can cause symptoms. For example, having a body mass index of 30 or higher can cause symptoms like those of low testosterone.
Symptoms that suggest low testosterone include:
Lowered sexual desire and activity.
Erectile dysfunction or decreased erections.
Breast tenderness or swelling.
Infertility.
Height loss, low-trauma broken bones, called fractures, or low bone mineral density.
Hot flashes or sweats.
Other possible symptoms include having less energy, motivation and confidence. Some men feel depressed and have trouble focusing. It's also possible to have a rise in sleepiness and sleep disturbances. Symptoms can include mild unexplained anemia, lower muscle mass and strength, and more body fat.
Experts suggest only testing older men for low testosterone if they have symptoms. If the first test shows low testosterone, experts suggest repeating the test to confirm the results. Your healthcare professional may look for conditions that can cause low testosterone:
Obstructive sleep apnea.
Obesity.
Stress from a serious illness, surgery or staying in the hospital.
Medicines such as opioid pain relievers.
Treating these conditions can return testosterone levels to the regular range.
If you have low testosterone, you’ll likely have more testing of the pituitary gland. The pituitary gland is a kidney bean-sized gland that sits at the base of the brain. It is part of the body's endocrine system. This system includes all the glands that make and control hormones. Healthcare professionals use pituitary gland testing to help find out whether the low testosterone is due to aging. Testing also can rule out low levels of other hormones.
Treatment recommendations for older men with low testosterone
Recommendations on testosterone therapy for men with age-related low testosterone vary.
In 2020, the American College of Physicians recommended that healthcare professionals think about starting testosterone treatment in men with sexual dysfunction who wanted to improve their sexual function, after explaining the risks and benefits. In 2018, the Endocrine Society recommended testosterone therapy for men with age-related low testosterone who have symptoms related to low testosterone.
Some experts also recommend offering testosterone treatment to men with age-related low testosterone who have no symptoms.
If you choose to start testosterone therapy, your healthcare professional talks with you about the different ways you can take it. You may also talk about target levels and the need for follow-up testing.
For some men, testosterone therapy eases bothersome symptoms of low testosterone. For others, the benefits aren't clear. There are possible risks, too.
Though more research is needed, testosterone therapy might raise the risk of prostate and breast cancer. Testosterone therapy also has been linked to blood clots in the veins. It also may raise the risk of heart attack and stroke, but more research is needed.
Your healthcare professional may tell you not to start testosterone therapy if your fertility is likely to be important in the near future. Other reasons your healthcare professional may recommend against testosterone therapy include:
History of breast or prostate cancer.
Untreated severe obstructive sleep apnea.
Uncontrolled heart failure, which lowers the heart's ability to pump blood.
History of blood clots in the legs or lungs.
Recent heart attack or stroke.
If you think you might have low testosterone, talk with your healthcare professional about your symptoms, testing and possible treatments. Your healthcare professional can help you weigh the pros and cons of treatment.
There is a problem with
information submitted for this request. Review/update the
information highlighted below and resubmit the form.
From Mayo Clinic to your inbox
Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.
Email
Address 1
ErrorEmail field is required
ErrorInclude a valid email address
Learn more about Mayo Clinic’s use of data.
We use the data you provide to deliver you the content you requested. To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, we may combine your email and website data with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, we will only use your protected health information as outlined in our Notice of Privacy Practices. You may opt out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the email.
Subscribe!
Thank you for subscribing!
You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.
Snyder PJ. Approach to older men with low testosterone. https://www.uptodate.com/contents/search. Accessed Feb. 15, 2025.
Qaseem A, et al. Testosterone treatment in adult men with age-related low testosterone: A clinical guideline from the American College of Physicians. Annals of Internal Medicine. 2020; doi:10.7326/M19-0882.
Melmed S, et al. Endocrine function and aging. In: Williams Textbook of Endocrinology. 15th ed. Elsevier; 2025. https://www.clinicalkey.com. Accessed Feb. 15, 2025.
Lincoff AM, et al. Cardiovascular safety of testosterone-replacement therapy. The New England Journal of Medicine. 2023; doi:10.1056/NEJMoa2215025.
Shumaker AD, et al. Does my patient have testosterone deficiency? Cleveland Clinic Journal of Medicine. 2024. doi:10.3949/ccjm.91a.23064.
Diem SJ, et al. Efficacy and safety of testosterone treatment in men: An evidence report for a clinical practice guideline by the American College of Physicians. Annals of Internal Medicine. 2020; doi:10.7326/M19-0830.
Bhasin S, et al. Testosterone therapy in men with hypogonadism: An Endocrine Society clinical practice guideline. The Journal of Clinical Endocrinology and Metabolism. 2018; doi:10.1210/jc.2018-00229.
Corona G, et al. European Academy of Andrology (EAA) guidelines on investigation, treatment and monitoring of functional hypogonadism in males: Endorsing organization: European Society of Endocrinology. Andrology. 2020; doi:10.1111/andr.12770.
Medical review (expert opinion). Mayo Clinic. Feb. 25, 2025.Some men develop physical and emotional symptoms when they reach their late 40s to early 50s.
Symptoms common in men this age are:
- depression
- loss of sex drive
- erectile dysfunction
- mood swings and irritability
- loss of muscle mass and reduced ability to exercise
- fat redistribution, such as developing a large belly or 'man boobs' (gynaecomastia)
- a general lack of enthusiasm or energy
- difficulty sleeping (insomnia) or increased tiredness
- poor concentration and short-term memory
These symptoms can interfere with everyday life and happiness. It's important to find the underlying cause and work out what can help to resolve it.
Male menopause causes
Male menopause is a term that is sometimes used, but it is misleading.
It suggests the symptoms are because of a sudden drop in testosterone in middle age, similar to what happens in female menopause. This is not true.
Testosterone levels do fall as men age. But the decline is steady at less than 2% a year from around the age of 30 to 40. This is unlikely to cause any problems.
But often the symptoms of 'male menopause' are nothing to do with hormones.
Personal or lifestyle issues
Lifestyle factors or psychological problems are often responsible for many of these symptoms.
For example, erectile dysfunction, loss of libido and mood swings may be the result of either:
There are also physical causes of erectile dysfunction. These may happen alongside any psychological cause.
Psychological problems can be brought on by work or relationship issues, divorce, money problems or worrying about family.
A midlife crisis can also be responsible. This can happen when men think they have reached life's halfway stage.
Anxieties over what they have accomplished so far in their job or personal life can lead to a period of depression.
Other possible causes of these symptoms include:
- lack of sleep
- poor diet
- lack of exercise
- drinking too much alcohol
- smoking
- low self-esteem
Late-onset hypogonadism
Sometimes the symptoms of male menopause may be the result of hypogonadism. This is where the testes produce few or no hormones.
Hypogonadism is sometimes present from birth. It can cause symptoms like delayed puberty and small testes.
Hypogonadism can also develop later in life, particularly in men who are obese or have type 2 diabetes.
This is known as late-onset hypogonadism. It can cause these male menopause symptoms.
But this is an uncommon and specific medical condition that is not a normal part of ageing.
A diagnosis of late-onset hypogonadism can usually be made based on your symptoms and the results of blood tests used to measure your testosterone levels.
Where to get help
If you're experiencing any of these symptoms, talk to your GP. They'll ask about your work and personal life. This is to see if your symptoms may be caused by a mental health issue, such as stress or anxiety.
If stress or anxiety are affecting you, you may benefit from medication or a talking therapy.
Exercise and relaxation can also help.
Read about:
Hormone replacement therapy (HRT)
Your GP may also order a blood test to measure your testosterone levels.
If you have a testosterone deficiency, you may be referred to an endocrinologist. This is a specialist in hormone problems.
Your specialist may offer you testosterone replacement to correct the deficiency. This should relieve your symptoms.
This treatment may be:
- tablets
- patches
- gels
- implants
- injections
Content supplied by the NHS and adapted for Ireland by the HSEOverview: Male Menopause/Andropause:
Testosterone is the hormone that gives males their deep voice, facial and body hair, and their muscular build. Men’s testosterone levels will decline as they age, especially beyond the age of 30. However, this is typically a slow and progressive decline of 1% to 2% per year.
Andropause is more frequently referred to as “male menopause.” It describes alterations in male hormone levels brought on by aging. The terms testosterone deficiency, androgen deficiency, and late-onset hypogonadism all refer to the same symptoms.
In men 50 years of age or older, male menopause is characterized by a decline in testosterone production. It frequently has a connection to hypogonadism. Both illnesses have symptoms that are related to low testosterone levels.
In men, the testes are where testosterone is produced. You get more from it than just sex drive. Additionally, it supports puberty changes, supports your mental and physical energy, supports muscle mass, supports your fight-or-flight response, and supports other essential evolutionary traits.
Male Menopause Causes:
In addition to controlling libido, sperm generation, and muscle growth, testosterone is crucial for maintaining bone health and blood formation in males. It is produced in the testes. As men age, their ability to generate sperm and testosterone levels both tend to decline. However, in addition to aging, various lifestyle choices or psychological issues may also contribute to a decline in testosterone levels.
These consist of
- Stress, depression, or anxiety can cause erectile dysfunction, loss of libido, mood swings, divorce, money troubles, worrying about aging parents, and a “midlife crisis,” in which men believe they have reached a halfway point in life. Stress, depression, or anxiety can also result from worries about what one has accomplished thus far, whether in one’s career or personal life.
- Erectile dysfunction can be brought on by both psychological causes and changes in the blood vessels.
- Lack of sleep.
- A poor diet.
- Lack of exercise.
- Drinking too much alcohol.
- Smoking
- Low self-esteem.
- Late-onset hypogonadism.
Male Menopause Symptoms:
Physical, sexual, and psychological issues can result from male menopause. As you age, they usually get worse. They may consist of
- low-energy.
- depression or sadness.
- decreased motivation.
- lowered self-confidence.
- difficulty concentrating.
- insomnia or difficulty sleeping.
- increased body fat.
- Physical weakness and a reduction of muscle mass.
- gynecomastia, or the development of breasts.
- decreased bone density.
- erectile dysfunction.
- reduced libido.
- Infertility
In addition, you can feel hot flashes, thinning body hair, smaller testicles, or swollen or painful breasts. Osteoporosis and low testosterone levels related to male menopause have been connected. Your bones become brittle and feeble as a result of this condition. These symptoms are uncommon.
Is Andropause in Men Similar to Menopause in Women?
Menopause and andropause both share some traits. The relationship between a woman’s ovaries, estrogen, brain, and pituitary—a tiny structure at the base of the brain necessary for hormone production—and a man’s testicles, testosterone, brain, and pituitary—explains the similarities. But one significant distinction is that not all men go through andropause. In contrast, menopause in women is common and expected, with the hormones’ shut-down occurring as a predictable event around age 50.
What are The Risks of Ignoring Andropause?
Andropause is frequently misdiagnosed as a simple “mid-life crisis” because it happens at a time when men start to doubt their purpose in life and past accomplishments. The signs of andropause, however, can cause a slow decline in health if neglected.
This may result in altered fat distribution, a loss of bone and muscle mass (osteoporosis), and shorter stature. This can then result in frailty and early aging.
Andropause Diagnosis:
To determine whether your symptoms correspond to those of men with low testosterone, a doctor will inquire about how you are feeling. The level of testosterone in the blood is then determined using a blood test. Before identifying andropause, your doctor will likely order tests to rule out other conditions that could be causing low testosterone levels, such as hypogonadism, which slows down sexual growth and development, diabetes, and high blood pressure.
The following steps will help the doctor determine whether a man is experiencing male “menopause”:
- Perform a physical exam.
- Ask about symptoms.
- Request tests to rule out any health issues that could be causing the situation.
- Get blood tests done, including one that checks your testosterone levels.
Male Menopause Treatment:
Men experiencing andropause are most often treated by replacing testosterone in their blood. In many circumstances, this treatment may assist enhance the quality of life while also relieving symptoms. Lifestyle adjustments like increased exercise, reduced stress, and a healthy diet are also beneficial. Given the risks associated with treatment, your doctor will assist you in determining whether testosterone therapy is appropriate for you.
There are numerous forms of testosterone available, including skin patches, pills, gels, and injections. When deciding which course of treatment is best for you, your doctor will frequently take into account your lifestyle. Once the initial therapy has started, it will be crucial to have follow-up appointments with your doctor. At subsequent appointments, your doctor will assess how you are responding to the treatment and make any necessary modifications.
- Skin patches: The hormone testosterone is delivered to wearers through the skin of the patch. A gradual, steady release of testosterone into the bloodstream is made possible by the patch. On the back, abdomen, upper arms, or thighs, it is put on once a day to a dry area of skin.
- Testosterone gel: The skin also receives this therapy directly, typically on the arms. One must be careful to wash their hands after each application of the gel because it could spread to other people through skin contact. Unwashed clothing that contains traces of medication should also be kept out of children’s reach.
- Capsules: This is yet another testosterone replacement option, to be taken twice daily after meals. Men who have liver disease, impaired liver function, severe heart or kidney disease, or excessive blood calcium levels should stay away from testosterone supplements.
- Testosterone injections: Every two to four weeks, testosterone (both testosterone cypionate and testosterone enanthate) is injected into the muscle as part of this treatment. Variations in testosterone levels could result in mood swings.
Self-help in Overcoming the Symptoms of Andropause:
- Lose weight
One of the most changeable risk factors for low testosterone is a smaller waist circumference. As a man’s testosterone level declines, his Body Mass Index (BMI) rises. Reduced testosterone is linked to male obesity.
- Stress less
Your body releases cortisol during times of stress, which raises blood sugar. The effects of testosterone can be countered by this hormone. This is because stress (and disease states) hasten the degeneration of “Leydig cells,” which are found in the testes and are in charge of producing testosterone.
- Consume more Zinc
Zinc needs must be met for healthy reproduction and hormonal balance. The pituitary gland cannot release the chemicals that urge the testes to make testosterone if zinc is not present. Lowered sperm production, decreased muscle endurance, and reduced testosterone levels can all result from inadequate zinc intake.
- Watch your sugar intake
After consuming sugar, testosterone levels drop. According to studies, testosterone levels decrease by 25% for up to two hours after consuming 75g of sugar.
- Regular exercises
Regular exercise can increase testosterone levels and slow the loss of this hormone. Increased testosterone may be a result of high-intensity exercise and intermittent fasting.
- Sleep matters
Sleep is when testosterone is mostly created. The amount of sleep a man gets at night can help forecast his morning testosterone levels in older men. Therefore, getting enough restful sleep is important.
- Limit or avoid alcohol
In addition to lowering testosterone levels, drinking alcohol can have an impact on libido and erectile function. Alcohol abuse can raise estrogen levels as well.
- Healthy diet
Increased consumption of fruits, vegetables, nuts, seeds, and fiber will support estrogen and testosterone balance.About Male Sexual Dysfunction
Erectile Dysfunction (ED)
Erectile dysfunction is defined as being unable to get or keep an erection that is firm enough to have sex. If you think you have ED and haven’t tried any medications, make an appointment with your primary care doctor first. For most men, a prescription from your primary care doctor is enough to treat ED. Duke urologists can help if medications have failed.
Peyronie’s Disease
Peyronie’s Disease is a form of erectile dysfunction and refers to a build-up of collagen, plaque or scar tissue that causes the penis to bend, curve or form an hourglass deformity, which makes erection painful.
Ejaculation Disorders
- Premature ejaculation refers to ejaculation that occurs before or soon after penetration.
- Inhibited or delayed ejaculation means ejaculation is slow to occur.
- Retrograde ejaculation refers to semen being forced back into the bladder at orgasm, instead of leaving the body through the urethra and out the penis.
Ejaculation Disorders Treatments
Behavioral Techniques
Your doctor may instruct you in several behavioral changes that can help you learn to delay ejaculation during sex.
Psychological Counseling
May be recommended to help reduce performance anxiety and help you find better ways to cope with stress.
Topical Anesthetics
May be recommended to reduce sensation and help delay ejaculation during sex.
Medication
Medications that keep the bladder neck muscle closed during ejaculation may be prescribed if retrograde ejaculation results in male infertility. Other medications may be prescribed to delay ejaculation.
Erectile Dysfunction and Peyronie's Disease
Lifestyle Changes
If you do not have an underlying health problem or physical abnormality, your doctor may suggest an exercise regimen, dietary changes and relaxation techniques that can increase your interest or sexual desire. Smoking cessation is encouraged and current medications are evaluated to look for pharmacological causes of ED.
Psychological Counseling
May be recommended as the first line of treatment for people with depression or anxiety.
Penis Pump
The vacuum erection device is a hollow tube with a hand- or battery-powered pump that promotes erection by increasing blood flow to the penis. It may be recommended if medication is not effective.
Penile Implant
A safe, reliable and effective treatment for erectile dysfunction (ED) and Peyronie’s Disease. An inflatable prosthetic device inserted directly into the penis to provide an erection suitable for intercourse. This minimally invasive procedure is performed through small incisions which minimizes blood loss and recovery time. We use a minimally invasive technique through a small incision which allows quicker return to normal activity.
Injections and Traction Therapy
A medication is injected into the Peyronie’s scar to straighten the penis without invasive surgery. Traction devices apply upward tension on the penis to stretch it. Over time, this reduces the curvature caused by Peyronie’s Disease.
Penile Plication
Straightens a penis bent by Peyronie’s Disease. Stitches gather tissue along the longer side of the penis so that it matches the short side.
Penile Grafting
Lengthens the shorter side of the penis by removing the scar tissue and adding healthy tissue (graft). Occasionally, grafting may be combined with a penile implant.-
Mayo Clinic Minute: How low testosterone can affect men’s health
Millions of men live with a testosterone deficiency. If left unchecked, this treatable condition may contribute to serious health problems like osteoporosis and lowered red blood cell production.
During National Men's Health Week — June 10–16 — Dr. Gregory Broderick, a Mayo Clinic urologist, encourages men with symptoms of low testosterone to speak with their healthcare team.
Journalists: Broadcast-quality video pkg (1:07) is in the downloads at the end of the post. Please courtesy: "Mayo Clinic News Network." Read the script.
Testosterone is a key male hormone that is responsible for characteristics like hair growth, muscle mass and deepening of the voice. As men age, testosterone levels gradually decline, particularly over 40.
"The main complaint I see as a urologist is a lack of interest in sexual functioning," says Dr. Broderick. "But fatigue, changes in mental acuity, less stamina and very often mild degrees of depression are associated with falling testosterone."
In some cases, infertility can be tied to low testosterone. But presenting these symptoms or traits is not an automatic diagnosis.
"Not all men need testosterone," says Dr. Broderick. "It's very important that this diagnosis is properly made based on symptoms but also the serum level of testosterone in the blood."
When it comes to treating low testosterone, the most common way is a cream applied to the upper arm, but injectable or pill forms of testosterone are also available.
"Each of those avenues is designed to get you back to a normal level of testosterone," says Dr. Broderick. "What you should notice is that within 48 to 72 hours of your dosage that your desire has improved."
Related articles:Avoiding aging is an impossible feat. The goal instead is to embrace getting older while taking steps to stay at the top of your game – physically and mentally. And while people may know that women go through changes as they age, there's less discussion about what men experience in their later years.
“We talk about menopause in women, but men experience changes, too,” explains Ali Dabaja, M.D., a urologist and men’s health expert at Henry Ford Health. “From youth all the way up to older adulthood, men undergo functional changes and changes in appearance.”
Here, Dr. Dabaja shares the changes men should expect throughout their lives and how they can be proactive about their health.
Men In Their Teens
The teen years are a period of tremendous growth and development. Most growth happens during the teen years, but some men can continue growing and developing into their 20s. “Men grow at different rates, depending on their genetics and other factors,” Dr. Dabaja says.
What to do: If you’re a parent, talk to your kids and make sure they’re comfortable with their bodies and the changes they’re experiencing.
Men In Their 20s
Among college exams, work demands and an active social calendar, many men have difficulty maintaining healthy habits during their 20s. Instead of eating a healthy diet and adopting a fixed workout regimen, they may find themselves indulging in late nights, fat-laden convenience foods and too much beer. To add insult to injury, the brain doesn’t reach full maturity until the mid-20s. This means young men are more likely to engage in risky behaviors, such as drinking and driving.
What to do: Adopt healthy habits now so that you’ll carry them into middle adulthood and beyond. Take steps to prevent substance abuse, accidents and sexually transmitted diseases that could have long-lasting effects – and get the appropriate screenings from your physician. You may also want to establish a baseline for markers such as blood pressure, diabetes and thyroid disease.
Men In Their 30s and 40s
Practicing self-care is critical during this time, especially when it comes to stress. It’s not uncommon for men in this age group to burn the candle at both ends in an attempt to stay on top of work and family demands. Unfortunately, that strategy can backfire. Not only can you suffer from too little sleep, but your body may undergo changes that make taking care of yourself even more important.
“In your 30s and 40s, your metabolism slows,” Dr. Dabaja says. “So, even if you’re eating the same amount of food, you’re likely to gain more weight.”
What to do: Commit to taking care of yourself. Eat a healthy diet, get seven to nine hours of sleep and work out four to five times each week. Then get screened for diabetes, thyroid disease and cardiovascular risk factors (including cholesterol levels and blood pressure).
Men In Their 50s+
After age 50, testosterone levels begin to dip, which causes changes in the way fat is distributed. Men might notice extra weight developing around their midsection, less hair on their head and more hair in their nose and ears. Estrogen and estradiol levels may rise at the same time, causing changes in breast tissue and a loss of muscle mass. They may also experience dips in sexual desire and function. When you're aware that these changes are coming, it’s less alarming when they happen.
What to do: Focus on brain and heart health. If you’re a smoker, get screened for lung cancer (and try to kick the habit). If you’re alarmed by changes in sexual function, seek help from a physician. There are a variety of treatments and you should be able to enjoy a healthy sex life well into your golden years. Then, get back to the basics: Take steps to prevent falls and accidents in and around your home, get your eyes checked so you have the appropriate prescription and work out to maintain your strength and balance. Also, continue screening exams, including screenings for colon cancer and prostate cancer.
The bottom line? Staying well into your senior years is an act of balance. Taking the above steps can help negate many of the changes that happen with age.
Reviewed by Ali Dabaja, M.D., a urologist who sees patients at Henry Ford Medical Center in Dearborn and Henry Ford Hospital in DetroitMen’s health topics are important to discuss with a doctor, but for many men it is difficult to have these conversations with their health care provider. Discussing sex, prostate health and hormonal imbalance can be uncomfortable, but understanding these conditions and how they affect overall health is critically important for every man.
Arnold Bullock, MD, Professor of Urologic Surgery at Washington University School of Medicine in St. Louis, specializes in men’s health. He encourages men to ask their questions and engage in honest conversations with their doctors. To help start this conversation, Bullock answers some of the questions regarding a common men’s health condition: Low Testosterone.
Low Testosterone: Frequently Asked Questions
What is Low Testosterone?
Low testosterone is a condition in which the testicles fail to produce the male sex hormone testosterone. According to the American Urological Association, about 2 men in every 100 have low testosterone.
The condition of low testosterone—also called hypogonadism—refers to an inadequate amount of testosterone to stimulate the male hormone receptors on some cells in the body, such as in the male reproductive organs, muscles and bones.
Testosterone levels change throughout a man’s life.
Newborn boys have very high testosterone levels, because they need that testosterone in utero to develop as males. From the age of two years until the start of puberty, a boy’s testosterone level is naturally very low. That level spikes again during puberty, causing boys to develop underarm hair, go through growth spurts and develop sexually. An adult male’s testosterone level should be between 270 and 1000. Testosterone levels peak at about the age of 20 years, and then the testosterone slowly declines with age. In younger men, the average testosterone level is in the range of 650. When the testosterone is under 300, that’s when we would consider an adult male to have low testosterone.
What are the symptoms of Low Testosterone?
There are several common signs of low testosterone:
- Low Sex Drive
- Erectile Dysfunction
- Low Sperm Count or Low Ejaculate Volume
- Depressed Mood
- Decreased Sex Drive
- Lethargy
- Fatigue
- Decrease in Muscle Mass
- Loss of Pubic, Facial and Underarm Hair
Many of these symptoms could have different causes, which is why it is so important for a man to bring his concerns to a doctor. If we know that you are experiencing these symptoms, we can get to work on testing to identify and treat the condition.
Most of my patients with low testosterone say, “Doc, I just don’t have energy. I don’t feel like cutting the grass or playing golf.”
How is Low Testosterone tested?
If you have one or more of the above symptoms, we will measure your testosterone level with a blood sample.
Testosterone levels vary throughout the day. Men have much higher testosterone in the early morning than they do at night. This is called diurnal variation. Because of this variation, it’s important to schedule a blood draw in the morning—especially for younger men, whose testosterone levels vary more drastically than those of a man over 65.
Any level over 350 is considered average. Some labs report testosterone levels up to 800 or 1000, but the average man probably won’t measure that high, and there is not a benefit to having a significantly higher testosterone level. For instance, your sex drive at 500 is not going to differ from your sex drive at a level of 350.
It’s when the testosterone level is below 300 that we begin to think about treatment options for most men.
How is Low Testosterone treated?
Low testosterone can be treated directly by taking hormone replacement therapy.
Testosterone supplements can be taken in a variety of forms. The most common form my patients prefer is a gel. The gel is convenient, because you can rub it in once a day, after you shower, dry off and start dressing. This is a small addition to your daily routine, and keeps your testosterone level very stable from day to day.
There are other forms of testosterone supplement, such as a patch or injection, that we can discuss with men.
Oral testosterone supplement pills are associated with risks for heart disease and liver disorders. While a pill might be convenient, it comes with greater risks than other forms of testosterone supplement.
Should I take a “testosterone booster?”
There is a lot of advertising on the radio, television and internet for “testosterone boosters.” The guys in these ads talk about how the products changed their lives, and they show results through before and after pictures of men who are slimmer and more muscular.
The problem with the word “booster” is that it is not a medical term.
When you want to sell a product, you can claim that it does whatever you want to say it does, as long as you don’t include a medical diagnosis in that claim. “Boost” is not a medical term. If a product says it is going to “raise your testosterone level,” that’s a medical claim. In the medical world, though, “boost” does not mean anything.
What is a testosterone “booster?” Basically, a men’s health multivitamin. If you read the list of ingredients on the bottle, they are mostly the same as what you find in an inexpensive multivitamin at the store. The difference is in the cost. These products cost much more than the average multivitamin, and they give you the impression that they are raising your testosterone levels, but they are not actually doing so.
The results that men see after taking these “boosters” are really from the workout guide that comes with the “booster.” Healthy lifestyle changes—improved diet and exercise—can improve the symptoms of low testosterone. Diet and exercise can increase energy levels, help you avoid a sedentary lifestyle and naturally improve heart health. It’s too bad you can’t buy the workout guide and leave behind the expensive “boosters.”
Making these lifestyle changes, in conjunction with hormone replacement therapy through testosterone supplements, can raise a man’s testosterone levels. If your doctor suggests testosterone supplements, your levels will be monitored regularly to measure the outcomes and monitor your health.
Treating Low Testosterone with the Division of Urology
The Division of Urology is an international leader in providing innovative, high-quality medical care. For men with low testosterone, Arnold Bullock and Dane Johnson, MD, offer the most advanced care available in a compassionate, respectful and responsive environment.Obesity and Low-T: What’s the Connection?
Of all the things about your body that change as you age, a significant concern to many men is low testosterone (Low-T).
While it’s true that testosterone tends to decline naturally in all men as they age, in some men, Low-T can contribute to fatigue, loss of muscle mass, low sex drive, ED, and even depression, according to the Urology Care Foundation.
Several things can contribute to Low-T, including:
- certain underlying medical conditions
- injuries
- infections
- autoimmune disease
- some medications or treatments, such as chemotherapy or antidepressants
One other significant risk factor for Low-T that has become more evident with recent research is being overweight or obese.
How is obesity tied to Low-T?
The connection between obesity and low-T presents a bit of a “chicken and egg” situation. Having Low-T can indeed cause a loss of muscle mass, which contributes to being overweight or obese in some men. However, studies have also clearly shown that being obese contributes to low testosterone levels in men. According to Harvard Health Publishing, waist circumference is the strongest individual predictor of testosterone deficiency.
“Studies suggest there is a bidirectional relationship between hypogonadism (low testosterone) and metabolic disorders like obesity,” says Michelle Pearlman, M.D., gastroenterology expert at the University of Miami Health System. “Some research has shown an inverse relationship between waist circumference and testosterone levels (i.e., the larger the waist, the lower the testosterone). Others have shown that low testosterone is associated with increased central obesity, as well, and that testosterone treatment may reduce waist circumference in those with low testosterone.”
When you look closely at the study results, the relationship between obesity and Low-T becomes even more evident.
In a 2007 study of almost 1,700 men aged 40 and over, every one-point increase in the men’s BMI was accompanied by a 2% lower testosterone level. In a similar 2004 study of more than 1,500 men aged 25 to 84, the researchers noted that waist circumference, rather than BMI, seemed to be tied to lower testosterone levels. The link was so strong that the researchers recommended using waist circumference as the preferred measurement for predicting testosterone levels before conducting lab tests.
Testosterone therapy in men with Low-T consistently leads to:
- sustained weight loss
- decreased fat mass
- increased lean mass
- better overall body composition
This was discussed in a 2014 review article that looked at several studies on testosterone therapy. The researchers noted that only bariatric surgery produced sustained and long-lasting weight loss on a level similar to testosterone therapy.
Healthy testosterone levels: An incentive for weight loss?
According to Dr. Pearlman, the jury is still out on whether simply losing weight can produce higher testosterone levels all on its own. Obesity is associated with a number of serious medical conditions. So its role in Low-T is another reason to commit to healthier lifestyle choices and weight reduction. “With obesity, particularly metabolic syndrome, men are at higher risk of developing other serious chronic medical conditions like heart disease, sleep apnea, type 2 diabetes, and certain cancers,” she says.
If you already have Low-T, it can be even more challenging to lose weight without treatment. Concerned about your symptoms? Dr. Pearlman recommends that men who suspect that they might have Low-T reach out to their health care providers. “Regardless of whether they qualify for medication or not, it’s important that men have a health care provider that they can discuss these concerns with,” says Dr. Pearlman. “This will help them determine if or when certain treatments are appropriate, as well as which lifestyle habits they need to focus on improving to reduce their symptoms related to Low-T.”
Wyatt Myers is a contributing writer for UMiami Health News.
Tags: Dr. Michelle Pearlman, hypogonadism, low testosterone, weight loss5 Common Questions about ED and Low-T
What is low testosterone?
Testosterone, a very important male hormone, helps power a man’s sex drive, reproductive abilities, event the development of muscle and bone. Production speaks in early adulthood so a gradual decline in testosterone is natural with age, but the degree varies by person.
When testosterone level gets too low, as measured with a blood test, the condition is called hypogonadism. Symptoms often include lower sex drive and overall energy levels, an increase in body fat and reduction in muscles mass, and feelings of moodiness or laziness.
How can I reduce my risk of Low T?
- Maintain a normal weight
- Manage stress levels
- Build muscle mass.
- Don’t skimp on sleep
Have more questions?
Schedule an appointment today with Ochsner's team of men's health specialists.
Schedule an appointment with an Ochsner urologist.5 Questions You’re Embarrassed To Ask Your Urologist
As a urologist, I work with patients on a variety of topics that they find embarrassing. I urge all patients to find a doctor that they are comfortable with, because discussing your health openly with your doctor is incredibly important. If you don't feel like you have a good rapport with your doctor, keep looking! Remember, as doctors, we talk about "embarrassing" subjects all day long, so what may feel embarrassing to you is most likely routine for us.
So, what are some common ‘embarrassing’ questions that I get asked? Read below to find out:
How do I know if I have low testosterone?
Symptoms of low testosterone include fatigue, erectile dysfunction, lack of sexual desire, and/or feelings of depression. If you have these symptoms, your doctor can check your testosterone levels. Low testosterone is confirmed with two morning testosterone levels that are low.
Can hot tubs cause infertility?
Hot tubs, saunas, and whirlpools can raise the temperature of the testicles enough to where even one exposure can lower your fertility for up to three months.
Can a urinary tract infection (UTI) cause erectile dysfunction, and is it transmittable to my sexual partner?
No, to both. A UTI can cause burning with urination, or sometimes blood in the urine. However, it should not cause erectile dysfunction, and it is not transmittable via sexual intercourse.
How do you know if you have a kidney stone?
Signs of a kidney stone include severe, intermittent flank and back pain often accompanied with nausea and vomiting. If you suspect you have a kidney stone, contact your doctor promptly.
Is a vasectomy reversible?
A vasectomy is reversible with success rates of up to 95%, but any patient receiving a vasectomy should undergo the procedure assuming it is permanent. The success of a vasectomy reversal cannot be guaranteed.
Get your questions answered: schedule an appointment with a urologist today!Once You Start TRT, Can You Stop?
Patients should always feel empowered to make decisions about their own health care. But if you decide to stop your TRT protocol, you’ll also stop feeling the benefits of optimized Testosterone levels.
Testosterone Replacement Therapy is an ongoing treatment to raise the amount of Testosterone in your body. If you quit TRT, your low Testosterone symptoms will likely return.
These symptoms typically include low libido, erectile dysfunction, fatigue, mood changes, depression, anxiety, poor body composition, and more.
In addition, your body’s Testosterone production has likely slowed as a result of receiving exogenous Testosterone (from a source outside the body).
To transition smoothly, you’ll want to restart your HPTA axis under the guidance of a knowledgeable provider. Not doing so can lead to more severe low Testosterone symptoms as your body loses its only source of Testosterone.
Does TRT Stop Natural Testosterone Production?
Receiving Testosterone from an external source can stop your body from making its own Testosterone. This is a natural biological process that occurs with many medications, but it can be a problem if you plan to stop TRT.
If you suddenly quit taking Testosterone, you could feel tired, have a low sex drive, experience erectile dysfunction, and other issues. These symptoms may persist unless you work with a provider to restart something called the HPTA, or Hypothalamic-Pituitary-Gonadal axis.
The longer you’ve been on TRT, the longer it will take for your body to restart its normal Testosterone production after stopping your protocol. Those who were on TRT for a short time, or who utilized HCG to keep their testes active, will likely have a smoother time coming off TRT.
Patients with low Testosterone who stop TRT will likely experience ongoing low T symptoms even after restarting the HPTA axis. TRT does not improve your body’s own Testosterone production, and because of that, you’ll return to your previous low levels.
What is the HPTA Axis?
In order for the body to produce Testosterone, it needs a balance of hormones from the hypothalamus, pituitary glands, and testicles. This is known as the Hypothalamus-Pituitary-Testicular axis (HPTA). Hormones involved include gonadotropin releasing hormone (GnRH) from the hypothalamus, luteinizing hormone (LH) from the pituitary gland, and Testosterone from the testicles.
When hormone levels in your blood increase, your pituitary gland stops releasing luteinizing hormone (LH). Without stimulation from LH, your testicles can’t create Testosterone.
This is why the main goal for patients coming off TRT is to restart the HPTA, which initiates endogenous Testosterone production (Testosterone secreted within the body).
How Can You Restart Your Testosterone Production?
To restart Testosterone production, it’s important to take a comprehensive approach.
This typically involves addressing the HPTA Axis, making lifestyle changes, consulting with healthcare professionals, and potentially utilizing medications or therapies as prescribed.
We’ll go over these strategies in-depth.
Consult with a Medical Provider
The most important step is to consult with a provider who can guide you through stopping TRT.
There are many physiological reactions to quitting your TRT protocol, and a medical provider can give you informed advice and prescribe medications to help ease the transition (if appropriate).
Address the HPTA Axis
The HPTA axis is responsible for natural Testosterone production. It can be challenging to restart this axis on your own once you discontinue TRT.
Medical providers often use a combination of treatments to help the different areas of the HPTA axis affected by negative feedback. This may include using hormones that stimulate Luteinizing Hormone (LH) and also stimulating testicular cells to make Testosterone.
Sometimes, providers will first give you HCG to help increase testicle size and Testosterone levels, and then follow up with Selective Estrogen Receptor Modulators (SERMs) to stimulate LH production. Learn more about restarting the HPTA axis.
Make Lifestyle Changes
Stress, poor diet, lack of exercise, drug use, smoking, drinking, and inadequate sleep can contribute to low Testosterone levels.
Making lifestyle changes like a balanced diet, regular exercise, stress management, and getting enough sleep can help improve Testosterone levels naturally.
These changes are unlikely to solve low T issues on their own, but they can help you address any barriers to Testosterone production.
Gradual Tapering
When discontinuing TRT, it’s better to gradually taper doses over several weeks or longer. This approach helps minimize the shock to your system and manage symptoms.
If you’re planning to stop TRT, make sure to talk with your provider so you have enough medication and can taper effectively.
Regular Exercise
Regular exercise has been shown to help maintain higher Testosterone levels over time.
Incorporating cardiovascular exercises and weight training into your routine may have a positive impact on Testosterone production.
Exercise is an important lifestyle change to support hormone production, but it won’t ease low Testosterone symptoms on its own.
What is Testosterone Replacement Therapy (TRT)?
Testosterone is an androgen produced by men and, to a lesser extent, women.
Testosterone plays an essential role in the development of male attributes, like body hair and increased muscle mass. It also helps with prostate and testes formation while impacting male sex drive and sperm production.
Testosterone plays other roles like helping to create red blood cells, regulating fat storage, and influencing mood. Without enough Testosterone, men often experience symptoms that impact their overall quality of life.
Testosterone Replacement Therapy supplements Testosterone to optimize levels for symptom relief. Testosterone is available in several delivery systems, most commonly injections and topical creams and gels.
Stop TRT with Defy Medical's Guidance
Wondering if you can stop TRT once you start?
Defy Medical offers provided-guided plans to help you get off TRT and restart your natural Testosterone production. Our protocols are designed to minimize discomfort and address symptoms as your body adjusts.
Ready to learn more?
Get StartedTestosterone is necessary for your overall health and not just your sexual wellness. It also helps when it comes to physical fitness which is why men tend to find ways to boost it as much as they can. Some resort to administering steroids on their own, which can lead to problems, which is why we have created this comprehensive guide on how to naturally amplify your testosterone production through diet.
It’s also critical for those who have testosterone deficiency as just making shifts in their diet can significantly impact their treatment. While diet is just one part of the formula, knowing what food to consume will be a great help on your journey to reach optimal testosterone levels.
Foods that Boost Testosterone
To ensure that men can sustainably maintain a testosterone-friendly diet, we have selected the best foods for testosterone that are also staples in a variety of dishes while also boasting a good nutrition profile for a balanced diet. Here are our top picks for foods that promote high testosterone:
- Red Onion
Red onions are rich in vitamin C and vitamin B6 which help with testosterone production. Vitamin C is linked to an increase in testosterone levels while an older study in vitamin B6 assists in testosterone synthesis. Since red onions are filled with antioxidants, it protects testosterone producing Leydig cells from oxidative stress or damage caused by free radicals.
Red onions also contain quercetin, a flavonoid that also helps with testosterone synthesis and even lowers blood sugar helping diabetic patients who suffer from hypogonadism and erectile dysfunction (ED). Onions also increase the secretion of the luteinizing hormone (LH) which signals the Leydig cells to produce testosterone. - Garlic
Just like onions, garlic also has considerable amounts of vitamin B6. A 2015 study on garlic also showed its restorative qualities on testicles where the Leydig cells that produce testosterone are located. Garlic is also loaded with bioactive compounds that help protect the hypothalamus and pituitary gland that regulate testosterone while also having antioxidant, anti-diabetic, and anti-obesity properties.
Since garlic contains the compound allicin and increases nitric oxide, it also promotes good circulation for better erection by relaxing the penile blood vessels. Garlic has also been shown to help in sperm production which means that it also boosts fertility for males. A lot of dishes sauté to enhance the flavor which means that there are lots of options for men when incorporating onion and garlic in their diet. - Olive Oil
One cannot sauté without the most critical component which is oil, and you can consume it as is as a salad dressing. But did you know you can boost your testosterone levels just by using olive oil? A study on Moroccan males found a 17.4% increase in LH and 42.6% increase in testosterone concentration among men after using extra virgin olive oil in an intervention.
Olive oil is also abundant in monosaturated fats, a “good” fat, and contains saturated fats which are linked to higher androgen levels. Note that the perspective on saturated fats being harmful has shifted over the years according to Harvard but it’s still best to prioritize the “good” fats for your overall health. - Oysters
Apart from being an additional source of healthy fats, oysters have a high nutritional density particularly with zinc and the B vitamins. A recent study has reconfirmed that zinc increases testosterone concentration in the body. The B vitamins also enhance testosterone supply and help form blood which is needed to have an erection.
Oyster also contains lots of selenium, a trace mineral associated with thyroid metabolism and fertility. Not only does selenium promote overall semen health and prevent erectile dysfunction, it also frees testosterone by separating it from sex-hormone binding globulins (SHBG) in males. While oyster is fantastic for zinc, be wary of consuming too much if you don’t want to throttle your copper or iron levels. - Eggs
Yet another versatile ingredient, eggs are one of the cheapest sources of protein for men who love working out which boosts your testosterone. But did you know that egg directly impacts your testosterone? Eggs are an excellent source of vitamin D, B vitamins, selenium, and zinc, all of which have studies that show a positive correlation to testosterone.
While eating either egg whites and whole eggs both increase testosterone, whole eggs provide greater benefit presumably because vitamin D is contained in the yolk. Eggs are also no longer perceived as alarming for health based on Harvard because it is low in saturated fat which is what the liver needs to produce cholesterol. But if you’re wary of cholesterol, you can opt to only eat egg white. - Sardines
Did you know that it’s safe to eat canned sardines despite being processed food? This is because there are no preservatives to your sardines. Instead, it is sterilized by heat. Sardines are also lower in mercury compared to other fishes. The only catch is that it’s high in purines which is bad for those with gout and kidney diseases, but you can lower that by skinning and boiling it.
This easy to access and affordable fish is also nutrient-dense with vitamin B12 and vitamin D which are directly proportional to testosterone levels. Vitamin D is important for erectile health and is critical for those with ED. Sardines also contain omega-3 which helps keep the heart healthy ensuring sufficient blood flow during arousal.
- Spinach
Remember how Popeye, the cartoon character, used to eat spinach before fighting the bad guys? Well, he was right because spinach does help you become stronger as it contains ecdysterone and nitrates. This means that just like eggs, spinach would be good for men who are trying to build muscle or doing resistance training which provides the highest testosterone boost out of all forms of exercise.
Spinach also contains lots of vitamin C. It also has iron which is critical for blood production and your energy levels. It’s also a useful source of magnesium which is positively correlated with testosterone. If you don’t have access to spinach, you can simply swap it with another dark leafy green vegetable. Just make sure to check the nutrition profile for a better fit to your dietary needs. - Avocado
When people think of avocado, they usually associate it with weight loss because of its high fat (the good ones too!) and low-carb composition. This means that this is especially good for males who are experiencing hypogonadism or ED in conjunction with obesity and diabetes. Not only that, men who suffer from testosterone deficiency are advised to avoid low-fat diets.
Avocados are also a reliable source of vitamins B and vitamin K which have been shown to be beneficial in testosterone. It also contains the mineral boron which has been showed to increase testosterone in both men and women after supplementation. Boron also helps protect against vitamin D deficiency and aids in the absorption of magnesium which are also important for testosterone production. - Pomegranate
While pomegranates are known as a symbol of fertility, it’s also an aphrodisiac for men because it increases testosterone levels. Pomegranates also come with vitamin C, vitamin K, and magnesium. Pomegranate is especially good for your circulation because not only does it promote good blood flow, it also protects against atherosclerosis.
Pomegranates are also abundant in antioxidants which means it protects from oxidative stress. This means it helps protect testosterone-producing cells from oxidative stress so that their function does not get impaired. Additionally, an older study also showed a direct increase in the salivary testosterone of its participants and an improvement in their mental well-being. - Dark Chocolate
Have you ever been told to eat chocolate when you feel down? This isn’t just because chocolates are delicious. It’s also because chocolates help manage your stress by lowering your cortisol levels. Cortisol and testosterone are inversely related which means that the lower cortisol there is in your bloodstream, the higher the testosterone levels. Note that dark chocolate is specifically recommended because of its low sugar content.
Cocoa, which is the main ingredient for creating chocolates, contains a good amount of magnesium and antioxidants. Just like red onions, it also has quercetin and another flavonoid called apigenin. Apigenin has been shown to increase testosterone levels and help delay the decline of testosterone due to age. But don’t binge on dark chocolate just yet if you have diabetes, check with your doctor if you are allowed. - Ashwagandha
Some think that ashwagandha became famous worldwide due to ayurveda, a traditional medical practice in India. While this may be true, this Asian herb is on par with superfoods because of the host of benefits that it provides. Ashwagandha also seems to be more beneficial for men because of how it improves both athletic and bedroom performance.
There are also multiple recent studies conducted directly on humans that show how Ashwagandha increases testosterone in men. For instance, this 2019 study showed an increase of 14.7% in testosterone and 18% in dehydroepiandrosterone sulfate (DHEA-S), an androgen that’s even more potent than testosterone, among older men. - Tongkat Ali
Another famous herb with strong associations to sexual health originating from Asia is tongkat ali. In fact, Tongkat Ali means “Ali’s Walking Stick” which alludes to how it can help men get hard. Studies also support how tongkat ali can help with ED specifically as indicated by a 2015 meta-analysis.
Tongkat ali also contains eurycomanone, a chemical compound that is the namesake of tongkat ali’s scientific name Eurycoma longifolia. Eurycomanone protects against testosterone deficiency by preventing testosterone from being converted into estrogen. Tongkat ali also helps fight against infertility by improving sperm quantity and motility.
Extra Tips for Your Diet
While incorporating any of these foods into your diet can make a positive difference in your testosterone concertation, it’s important to be flexible in your diet. Remember, a balanced diet is necessary. Here are our other tips so that you can safely enhance your testosterone without sacrificing your overall health:
- You can eat alternatives. If you are allergic to any of these or don’t like its taste, simply search for alternatives for the food (e.g. spinach alternatives). You can also search for alternatives in terms of the nutrient that you are targeting. For example, you want to eat spinach because you want to increase your magnesium intake. Just search “food rich in magnesium.” If spinach is part of a dish you are cooking, you might want to change it to “vegetables rich in magnesium” as there is a higher chance that it will give an ingredient that is compatible with your dish.
- Avoid dietary “conflict of interest.” What does this mean? Even if an ingredient is recommended for good testosterone, if you have an underlying condition like an allergy, it’s best to not consume it. Another example is if you have diabetes. While cocoa has benefits related to testosterone, it might be counterproductive since eating a lot of chocolates can worsen your diabetes. In the end, not only will it put your health in danger, but it will also sabotage your attempts to boost your testosterone.
- Take care of the entire system that is related to testosterone production. Your testicles aren’t the only thing that is responsible for your testosterone. Both your brain, courtesy of the hypothalamus and pituitary gland, and kidneys, courtesy of the adrenal cortex, are also involved in testosterone production and maintenance. This means, take dietary measures to protect these organs. For example, protect your kidney by regulating your salt and sugar consumption and drinking lots of water.
- You can combine all of these. While you can consume these ingredients alone or only select some of them, you can eat them all in one day as part of a meal plan. Here is a sample meal plan utilizing all our suggested foods:
Breakfast – Baked Avocado Egg or Avocado Egg Salad and Ashwagandha Tea
Lunch – Pan-seared Salmon and Spinach (can sauté with onion and garlic) and Pomegranate Juice
Dinner – Oyster Stew with either Dark Chocolate as a dessert or a Glass of Chocolate Milk
Takeaway
A healthy diet is one of the cornerstones of preventative healthcare which is why making tweaks in what you eat can improve your testosterone levels and the other key areas of your health. Still, it is important to remember that diet alone will not solve your testosterone deficiency which means that you need to incorporate other lifestyle best practices like getting enough rest and exercising. By consuming any of these foods (in moderation), you are already one step ahead in your recovery from testosterone deficiency.
Want more meal plans that are tailored to your testosterone deficiency and underlying conditions? Men’s Health Clinic (MHC) has dietitians that can help you take your diet to the next level. What’s more, since we use a multidisciplinary approach, we also have other experts like psychologists and doctors that are ready to help you say goodbye to hypogonadism. Just book an appointment with us to check all your treatment options.Personalizing Care for Patients with Low Testosterone
Professor of Clinical Urology
Yale Urology
330 Orchard Street, Suite 164
New Haven, CT 06511
203-785-2815
Stanton.Honig@yale.edu
Managing patients with low testosterone is both an art and science. It is important to find a doctor who understands and is familiar with multiple options for the delivery of testosterone to patients who would benefit from this therapy.
Patient should not be screened for low testosterone. However, if you are a patient and you feel like you have a low sex drive or your energy level is low and feeling sluggish, this may be a result of low testosterone.
You should be checked for testosterone levels in the early morning. This is because in most patients, testosterone levels are highest in the morning.
- You should also be checked for hormone levels called luteinizing hormone or LH and follicle stimulating hormone or FSH. This will help identify the underlying cause of the problem.
If your testosterone is low, you should have a discussion with your doctor to discuss the pluses and minuses of testosterone replacement therapy.
In 2022, there are multiple delivery system options for testosterone replacement therapy. These include pills by mouth, Once per week subcutaneous injections, Once every two weeks intramuscular injections, testosterone nasal spray, topical gels as well as four-month depot pellets. At Yale Medicine Urology, we try to personalize care to specific needs of the patient.
After you have been started on some form of treatment, you should have a follow-up visit to discuss how your symptoms are being controlled and to have follow up blood test to measure your testosterone levels, your blood count. This is important because a small percentage of patients may see a mild thickening of their blood or hematocrit. If you are over 50 or have a family history of prostate cancer, you should have a screening test for prostate cancer or PSA as well.
Is important to find a doctor who understands all these medications so they can help you choose the best option for you. For instance, it is important to check testosterone levels about 4 to 6 hours after taking medicines by mouth or by nasal spray. This is when testosterone levels peaks with this type of treatment. On the other hand, with subcutaneous testosterone injections usually there is a steady state so it does not matter when you have the blood test drawn. With intramuscular testosterone therapy, if you check blood levels three days after treatment it would likely be high. At seven days, it will be in the normal range and at 10 days it will likely be low. Finding a doctor who understands this is very important to optimizing your care.
Patients who are considering children in the future need special consideration. Most Testosterone therapy will lower sperm count , in many cases to zero. The good news is that there are options for increasing testosterone that will not have a negative effect on Sperm. Findings a physician who understands this and asks the right questions is very important as well.
At Yale Medicine Urology. we have a full understanding of testosterone replacement therapy and offer all treatment options. If you have the signs and symptoms of low testosterone such as low sex drive, low energy or decreasing muscle mass, feel free to reach out and make an appointment to receive personalized care.By Mike Kocsis | 10 minutes read | Last updated: August 14, 2025 Categories: Testosterone
Medically Reviewed by Dr. George Touliatos
Testosterone replacement therapy (TRT) has gained a lot of popularity over the last two decades. However, some men are still unaware of its benefits and risks, and so can’t decide whether to seek treatment or not.
If that sounds like you, you have come to the right place! In this article, we will talk about the pros and possible side effects of TRT so you can find out if you are a suitable candidate for this treatment or not.
Pros of TRT: 9 Benefits of TRT you should know
There are many reasons why you should go for testosterone therapy. Enlisted below are some key advantages of this medical procedure.
Improves sexual function
TRT raises levels of serum testosterone, which is required to increase a man’s sex drive, erectile function, and overall sexual function.
A recent study shows that men with low T notice an improvement in their libido, sexual satisfaction, and symptoms of erectile dysfunction after getting TRT.
Improves bone mineral density
Men with low T notice a significant bone density reduction. TRT may help them recover their bone mineral density, improving overall bone health and reducing the risk of fractures even in older adults.
In a 2019 study of 25 men with hypogonadism, researchers noticed a modest improvement in participants’ bone density.
Increases muscle mass
Muscle mass naturally declines with age. Low T also causes muscle loss. You can reverse this issue through testosterone supplementation.
TRT is linked to improved muscle mass in both younger and older men.
Reverses symptoms of hypogonadism
TRT is traditionally used to reduce the symptoms of hypogonadism, a condition in which your testes fail to produce and maintain healthy testosterone levels. It has two types – primary and secondary male hypogonadism.
In primary hypogonadism, the testes don’t produce testosterone even after getting signals from the brain. In contrast, in secondary hypogonadism, the testes don’t receive any signal from the brain to produce testosterone.
If you have any of these conditions, TRT can help you reduce its symptoms, such as loss of bone mass, low bone density, decreased facial hair growth, and erectile dysfunction.
Boosts energy levels
Another worth mentioning benefit of testosterone therapy is its positive impact on your energy levels. Testosterone can help you feel more energetic and active.
A 2022 study conducted on men with late-onset hypogonadism concludes that “TRT for >1 year was associated with significantly lower fatigue scores.”
Improves mood and concentration
Low T can cause irritability, anxiety, depression, mood swings and even brain fog. All these side effects can disturb your life, especially social and professional lives.
The good news is that studies show TRT can help tackle mood related issues and depressive symptoms associated with hypogonadism.
Better quality of life
With healthy testosterone levels, you can feel better mentally, physically and emotionally.
TRT restores your testosterone levels which positively influence energy, fatigue, emotional stability, cognitive sharpness and more. All these benefits collectively translate into improved daily functioning and an overall higher quality of life.
Several options for taking testosterone
You can take testosterone in different ways, for instance, through gels, patches, or injections.
You can select any of these methods based on what you find more convenient and what suits your budget. Each method has its own pros and cons. You can discuss them with your doctor and select the one that best suits you.
FDA-approved
TRT is an FDA-approved procedure, meaning its safety and efficacy have been tested and proven by experts. The FDA cautions that TRT should be used for men whose testosterone levels are low because of a medical condition, not old age.
Cons of TRT: 7 Downsides of TRT you need to be aware of
Infertility and testicular shrinkage
Many sources suggest TRT affects fertility by bypassing the brain-testes signalling system.
Testes stop making internal testosterone and sperm because they are no longer being told to. Over time, they may also shrink (testicular atrophy).
However, nowadays there is a treatment you can take in conjunction with TRT that stops it from affecting sperm count (TRT with hCG).
Cardiovascular health
Data also shows an increased risk of heart disease or cardiovascular diseases, but results have been mixed on this topic.
Some studies indicate TRT may increase cardiovascular disease risk, particularly in the first two years of the treatment, while others show that it may offer cardiovascular benefits.
Prostate health
There was an initial concern that testosterone therapy could cause prostate cancer or worsen symptoms of benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH). However, many of the latest studies show no such connection between TRT and prostate health.
A 2023 trial involving 5246 hypogonadal men with low initial prostate cancer risk found no difference in prostate cancer diagnosis between TRT users and placebo after 3 years of follow-up.
However, screening (PSA checks and digital rectal examinations) before and during TRT is still essential. And TRT in adult men with a history of prostate cancer should be approached cautiously, if at all.
Gynecomastia and skin issues
Like any other medical procedure, testosterone therapy also has its cons.
Some men report skin reactions or acne, breast enlargement, and worsening sleep apnea after starting TRT. However, these side effects are not common and they can be managed with dose adjustment or changes in the delivery method.
Blood clot risk
TRT patients may have a high risk of red blood cell clots, specifically venous thromboembolism (VTE). However, studies show mixed results in this regard.
To ensure the safety of the testosterone supplementation, TRT providers regularly test red blood cell levels. If these levels exceed the normal range, they may hold or adjust your medication.
Hair loss
TRT may contribute to hair loss, especially if you are genetically at a higher risk of male pattern hair loss (androgenetic alopecia).
Long-term treatment
TRT is a long-term commitment that requires strict compliance and careful management to avoid complications. Stopping it can bring your testosterone levels back to your initial levels, making unpleasant low testosterone side effects return.
Understanding low testosterone
Testosterone is considered the primary sex hormone in healthy men as it helps them develop secondary sexual characteristics. It is produced and secreted by the testes when they receive signals from the pituitary gland.
The normal testosterone level falls between 300 to 1,000 nanograms per deciliter (ng/dL). If your testosterone is below 300 ng/dL, you may have low testosterone.
What are low T symptoms?
Low testosterone produces different symptoms in different individuals. A lot of men report the following symptoms:
- Bone mass loss
- Muscle mass loss
- Low libido
- Erectile dysfunction
- Hot flashes
- Fatigue
- Difficulty concentrating
- Memory problems
- Lack of energy
- Irritability
- Depression
- Anxiety
- Low self-esteem
- Increased body fat
Experiencing these symptoms can be unsettling, and while they may align with various conditions, it’s crucial to recognize that they are not exclusive to one specific cause.
How to diagnose low T?
Fatigue, hot flashes, or changes in energy levels may be indicative of several underlying health problems. Therefore, should you ever find yourself grappling with such symptoms, it is highly advisable to seek the expertise of a medical professional.
Your doctor will run a few tests. If they suspect you’re testosterone-deficient, they may include a testosterone blood test.
Testosterone blood tests measure the total testosterone concentration in your blood serum. Your doctor may ask you to have this test several times, as testosterone levels can fluctuate for multiple reasons.
What are the causes of Low T?
Low testosterone can be brought on by a number of factors. While it is normal for men to have low T due to old age (also called age-related low testosterone), it can also be caused by other conditions, such as:
- Testicular cancer
- Male breast cancer
- Injury to the testicles
- Brain injury
- Pituitary gland disease
- Radiation cancer treatment
- Genetic conditions like Klinefelter’s syndrome
- Obesity
- Stress
- Alcohol or drug abuse
- Hypogonadism
Identifying the main cause of low T is the first step in fixing the problem. Once the issue is diagnosed, your doctor will design a treatment plan accordingly.
TRT for low T or hypogonadism
Testosterone replacement therapy is a hormone therapy given to men with age-related low testosterone or those who are simply unable to produce testosterone in normal amounts.
Over the last few years, TRT has been used by millions of men to increase testosterone serum levels and reduce low T symptoms.
There are different types of TRT based on how the hormone is administered in the body. Some key TRT methods include:
Testosterone topical gel
As the name indicates, it is the gel form of testosterone that is applied directly to the skin. It is one of the most convenient TRT forms.
However, the user should be cautious while using the gel. He should not go near fire or rub any other skin surface with the surface having gel.
Testosterone injection
Injections are the standard form of TRT in which the hormone is administered just under the skin with a tiny needle. Generally, these injections are given once a week. Follow your doctor’s instructions for best results.
Testosterone transdermal patch
Patches containing testosterone are applied directly to the skin at least once a day.
Doctors often advise patients to select a different area for the patch application each day. Compared to other forms of TRT, patches can cause skin irritation and redness.
Testosterone buckle patch
It is a tablet-shaped pouch placed between the gum and the upper lip. You can drink liquids and chew gum while the patch is in its place. A buckle patch may cause gum irritation and lip swelling.
Oral testosterone
Testosterone capsules (testosterone undecanoate) are also available. They are more convenient compared to other forms of TRT described above.
However, they may cause liver toxicity and high blood pressure, due to which the FDA has approved oral testosterone only for men who have low T due to a medical condition.
Nasal testosterone gel
Natesto is an FDA-approved nasal gel that is applied inside the nose, from where it gets absorbed rapidly. It is used 2 to 3 times per day.
You may need to take testosterone in a different way if you have a cold or nasal congestion.
Testosterone pellet
It is a pill-like structure that is implanted under the skin through a minor procedure. A single pellet can last from three to six months. Since it involves skin breakage, it may result in skin infection and scarring.
How to avoid TRT cons?
Testosterone treatment comes with its unique pros and cons. If you are experiencing low T symptoms, you should discuss your situation with your doctor to find a suitable solution. They can help you understand TRT better and determine whether you are a suitable candidate for it or not.
If TRT is the right treatment for you, a professional hormone health specialist will guide you throughout your testosterone deficiency treatment in a way that avoids potential side effects.
Work with us today to get a customized TRT treatment plan that suits your health condition and goals just right.
FAQs about TRT pros and cons
Is there any other way to increase testosterone?
If your low testosterone levels are due to stress, lack of sleep or any other similar issues, improving your lifestyle may help boost them naturally. But if the cause is a medical condition like hypogonadism, TRT is the most effective solution.
How long will TRT take to show its effects?
Your doctor will most likely confirm improvement in your testosterone levels within 6 months.
For how long will I have to take TRT?
TRT is a lifelong procedure. The moment you stop taking testosterone, your testosterone levels will drop again.
Summary
TRT can offer significant benefits, from increased energy levels and muscle mass to improved mood and cognitive function. However, it’s crucial to weigh these advantages against potential drawbacks, such as the risk of side effects and the need for ongoing monitoring.
Deciding on TRT should be a thoughtful, informed process, ideally undertaken in consultation with healthcare professionals who can tailor the treatment to individual needs.
As with any medical intervention, an understanding of the potential benefits and potential risks better equips you to make an informed choice about your health.
Ultimately, the journey towards hormonal balance requires a comprehensive approach, where the pros and cons of TRT are carefully considered in the context of overall well-being.
If you’re thinking about starting TRT, don’t hesitate to get in contact with our very own specialist doctors by clicking the button below.
References
Zhang, W., Cui, Z., Shen, D., Gao, L. and Li, Q., 2025. Testosterone levels positively linked to muscle mass but not strength in adult males aged 20–59 years: a cross-sectional study. Frontiers in Physiology, 16, p.1512268.
Bhasin, S., Travison, T.G., Pencina, K.M., O’Leary, M., Cunningham, G.R., Lincoff, A.M., Nissen, S.E., Lucia, M.S., Preston, M.A., Khera, M. and Khan, N., 2023. Prostate safety events during testosterone replacement therapy in men with hypogonadism: a randomized clinical trial. JAMA Network Open, 6(12), pp.e2348692-e2348692.
de Almeida Ferreira, M. and Mendonça, J.A., 2022. Long-term testosterone replacement therapy reduces fatigue in men with hypogonadism. Drugs in context, 11, pp.2021-8.
Evidence Based Research
This article has been researched and written based on scientific evidence and fact sheets that have then been crossed checked by our team of doctors and subject matter experts.
References, sources and studies used alongside our own in-house research have been cited below, most of which contain external clickable links to reviewed scientific paper that contain date stamped evidence.
Our team of healthcare experts and GMC registered doctors are licensed to UK GMC standards. We strive to provide you with the latest evidence based, researched articles that are unbiased, honest and provide you with accurate insights, statistics and helpful information on the discussed topic to ensure you gain a better understanding of the subject. You can read more about our Editorial Process by clicking here.
We value your feedback on our articles, if you have a well-researched paper you would like to share with us please contact us.
Quick Low Testosterone Test
If you know your total testosterone reading from a previous blood test input the results to the left above to see if your testosterone levels are normal.
Low Testosterone Levels
You may have low testosterone depending on the symptoms you have, please contact us to find out how we can help.
Please Retry
The Total Testosterone Level You Entered Is Incorrect. Figure Must be in nmol/L you can use our converter here.
Normal Testosterone Levels
Your testosterone levels appear to be in the normal range.
LOOKING GOOD!
You must be over 38, have had your ovaries removed or have suffered with premature menopause to warrant further hormone tests.
Further investigation needed
Please contact us to discuss your hormones, we need your total testosterone levels to validate your hormone deficiency. You can order a blood test here.
Low Testosterone Levels
You may have low testosterone depending on the symptoms you have, please contact us to find out how we can help.
High Testosterone Levels
You appear to have higher than normal testosterone levels, please contact us for further investigation.
Normal Testosterone Levels
You appear to have normal testosterone levels. Contact us if you have any concerns.Welcome to ReNEW Vitality! I’m glad you stopped by.
Are you a woman who feels frustrated and dragged down by low physical energy or other nagging health worries? Maybe you struggle with having too little energy, digestive distress, mood swings or memory issues? Or perhaps you worry about aging with your joints, stamina, or mind in tact?
You have tried to get help from different sources, yet the advice you’ve received has not made a lasting difference and you’re still looking for improvement. If you’re like my clients, you feel ready for change and not sure how to achieve it, but you know you want to feel well, be active, joyful, and excited by life.
My style
I’m passionate about helping women take control of their health to renew their sense of vitality and overall wellbeing. I see myself as a client’s companion in the sleuthing process of discovering both what’s undermining her ability to be well and her options for healing.
I connect authentically from my heart, while focusing on what’s going on beneath the surface. I ask questions, listen carefully, and guide a discovery and learning process that enables my client to fit together the various pieces of her unique health puzzle and make the sustainable changes that best support her needs and health goals.
My credentials
On a professional level, I hold a graduate degree in Public Health and certifications as a Functional Nutrition and Lifestyle Practitioner and as a Health Coach.
On a personal level, I know what it’s like to feel run down, with too little oomph to fulfill my responsibilities much less reach for my dreams. Since, I’ve been able to reclaim my health in significant ways, and I’d like to help you do that as well!
Want to learn more?
If you’d like to read more, check out my About page. If you feel ready to contact me, click here.Cedars-Sinai Blog
Research Finds Testosterone Therapy Safe for Heart Health
Sep 17, 2024 Lisa Fields
In middle age, men’s testosterone levels often drop. Sometimes, low testosterone levels don’t cause symptoms, but the decrease can lead to reduced libido, erectile dysfunction, cardiovascular disease, obesity or depression.
Men with symptoms of low testosterone may seek treatment, such as testosterone replacement therapy. For years, physicians debated testosterone replacement therapy’s impact on cardiovascular health. Now, new research has confirmed testosterone replacement therapy doesn’t increase the risk of heart attack or stroke.
“When patients have symptoms of low testosterone, physicians can feel more comfortable that prescribing testosterone supplements to maintain normal physiologic levels does not come with a significant liability,” said cardiologist Prediman K. Shah, MD, director of the Cedars-Sinai Atherosclerosis Prevention and Management Center.
Prediman K. Shah, MD
New Research Confirms Testosterone Replacement Safety
A landmark study, published in 2023, tracked more than 5,200 men between the ages of 45 and 80 who had low testosterone levels. The findings, published in the New England Journal of Medicine, showed testosterone replacement therapy did not increase the risk of heart attack or stroke, compared to placebo.
“That’s reassuring, because in the past, physicians have been concerned about testosterone supplements increasing red blood cell count, leading to blood clots and increased heart attack risk,” Shah said.
Previous research in testosterone replacement therapy and cardiovascular risk had mixed results.
“Now, physicians can feel assured about their recommendations for patients with low testosterone levels."
“Some studies showed possible benefits, while others showed possible risks, which was confusing for patients, as well as physicians trying to advise patients,” said Howard Kim, MD, a Cedars-Sinai urologist. “Now, physicians can feel assured about their recommendations for patients with low testosterone levels.”
The research did find a slight increase in atrial fibrillation risk among men who received testosterone therapy. Arash Nayeri, MD, a Cedars-Sinai cardiologist, says patients who are concerned about the risk should discuss it with their doctor.
“No therapy is 100 percent safe, and the risk profile is pretty similar to most other medications we take, even in high-risk cardiovascular patients,” said Nayeri.
However, the research has not addressed the safety of testosterone replacement therapy in men older than 80 or younger than 45.
“Testosterone therapy isn’t for younger men seeking to boost athletic endeavors or men without a documented low-testosterone evaluation,” Kim said.
Howard H. Kim, MD
Testosterone Therapy May Improve Quality of Life
Primary care physicians, urologists and endocrinologists can prescribe testosterone replacement therapy. These physicians typically consult with a patient’s cardiologist (if they have one) about the risks and benefits of testosterone replacement therapy for each patient individually. Once patients begin testosterone replacement therapy, physicians regularly track their cholesterol levels and prostate health, in addition to their testosterone levels.
Many physicians prescribe testosterone to patients in the form of topical gel, transdermal patches, pills or injections.
“Often, topical gel therapy is the easiest to try, because it’s not invasive,” Kim said. “It provides a gentle boost to testosterone levels, instead of the big swings you might get with injection therapy.”
Symptoms of low testosterone such as erectile dysfunction or decreased libido can be awkward to discuss. But having these uncomfortable conversations with your primary care doctor or urologist may help you learn whether you have low testosterone levels. If you do—and you’re close to, or between, ages 45 and 80—you may be a candidate for testosterone replacement therapy.
“You need to advocate for yourself in your doctor’s office,” Nayeri said. “Unless you bring this up, chances are your doctor won't.”
The 2023 study only tracked the effects of testosterone replacement therapy for a few years, so more research is needed to confirm long-term safety.
“We still don’t know for sure if testosterone supplements are completely safe for lifelong use,” said Shah. “More research is needed, even though the results of the published study are reassuring.”Researchers: testosterone treatment effective for older men
As men age, their sexual function, vitality and strength can decline, but researchers had not yet established whether testosterone treatment is actually beneficial. Now, a team that included UF Health researchers has established testosterone’s benefits in a study published today (February 17) in the New England Journal of Medicine.
The paper examines the first three of seven trials in a long-term study called The Testosterone Trials, or the TTrials. In this first study, researchers analyzed the results of the first three trials, which examined sexual function, physical function and vitality, including mood and depressive symptoms, walking speed and walking distance.
The researchers found that the treatment increased the blood testosterone level from moderately low to mid-normal in men ages 19-40 and improved all aspects of sexual function, including sexual activity, sexual desire and the ability to get an erection.
"The study reinforced the results we expected to see, except for walking speed," said Marco Pahor, M.D., the director of the UF Institute on Aging and a co-author of the paper.
In 2003, the Institute of Medicine reported there was not enough evidence to support a beneficial effect of testosterone in men who have low levels of the hormone. This report was the impetus for the TTrials, which are now the largest trials to examine the use of testosterone treatment in men 65 and older whose low testosterone levels can be attributed to age alone.
"The results of the TTrials show for the first time that testosterone treatment of older men who have unequivocally low testosterone levels does have some benefit," said Peter J. Snyder, M.D., the principal investigator of the TTrials and a professor in the division of endocrinology, diabetes and metabolism at the University of Pennsylvania’s Perelman School of Medicine. "However, decisions about testosterone treatment for these men will also depend on the results of four other trials — ;Cognitive Function, Bone, Cardiovascular and Anemia — ;and the risks of testosterone treatment."
Researchers screened 51,085 men and found 790 who had a sufficiently low testosterone level to be part of the study. The subjects were randomized into two groups: one that applied a daily testosterone gel and the other a daily placebo gel, for one year. The researchers evaluated participants at three, six, nine and 12 months, assessing their sexual function with questionnaires; physical function with questionnaires and the distance walked in six minutes; and vitality, mood and depressive symptoms using questionnaires.
Across the three trials, adverse events including heart attack, stroke, other cardiovascular events and prostate conditions were similar in men who received testosterone and those who received a placebo. However, the number of men in the TTrials was too small to draw conclusions about the risk of testosterone treatment.
"A larger and longer-term trial will be needed to have more definitive results regarding safety," Pahor said. "However, this trial did not confirm earlier, smaller trials that raised serious concerns regarding cardiovascular safety."
The TTrials were conducted at UF and the Perelman School of Medicine at the University of Pennsylvania as well as 11 other sites, including Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Baylor College of Medicine, Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Harbor-UCLA Medical Center, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine, Puget Sound Health Care System, University of California at San Diego School of Medicine, University of Minnesota School of Medicine, University of Pittsburgh School of Public Health and Yale School of Medicine.
The TTrials were supported by grant U01 AG030644 from the National Institute on Aging and the National Institutes of Health. The TTrials were also supported by the National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute; the National Institute of Neurological Diseases and Stroke; and the National Institute of Child Health and Human Development. AbbVie, formerly Solvay and Abbott Laboratories, also provided funding, AndroGel and placebo gel.Sleep loss lowers testosterone in healthy young men
Sleep loss lowers testosterone in healthy young men
May 31, 2011
Cutting back on sleep drastically reduces a healthy young man's testosterone levels, according to a study published in the June 1 issue of the Journal of the American Medical Association (JAMA).
Eve Van Cauter, PhD, professor in medicine and director of the study, found that men who slept less than five hours a night for one week in a laboratory had significantly lower levels of testosterone than when they had a full night's sleep. Low testosterone has a host of negative consequences for young men, and not just in sexual behavior and reproduction. It is critical in building strength and muscle mass, and bone density.
"Low testosterone levels are associated with reduced well being and vigor, which may also occur as a consequence of sleep loss" said Van Cauter.
At least 15 percent of the adult working population in the US gets less than 5 hours of sleep a night, and suffers many adverse health effects because of it. This study found that skipping sleep reduces a young man's testosterone levels by the same amount as aging 10 to 15 years.
"As research progresses, low sleep duration and poor sleep quality are increasingly recognized as endocrine disruptors," Van Cauter said.
The ten young men in the study were recruited from around the University of Chicago campus. They passed a rigorous battery of tests to screen for endocrine or psychiatric disorders and sleep problems. They were an average of 24 years old, lean and in good health.
For the study, they spent three nights in the laboratory sleeping for up to ten hours, and then eight nights sleeping less than five hours. Their blood was sampled every 15 to 30 minutes for 24 hours during the last day of the ten-hour sleep phase and the last day of the five-hour sleep phase.
The effects of sleep loss on testosterone levels were apparent after just one week of short sleep. Five hours of sleep decreased their testosterone levels by 10 percent to 15 percent. The young men had the lowest testosterone levels in the afternoons on their sleep restricted days, between 2 pm and 10 pm.
The young men also self-reported their mood and vigor levels throughout the study. They reported a decline in their sense of well-being as their blood testosterone levels declined. Their mood and vigor fell more every day as the sleep restriction part of the study progressed.
Testosterone levels in men decline by 1 percent to 2 percent a year as they age. Testosterone deficiency is associated with low energy, reduced libido, poor concentration, and fatigue.
The National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute funded this study. Additional funding came from the National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases, and the National Institutes of Health. Rachel Leproult, PhD, organized and supervised the experiment, which took place in the University of Chicago Clinical Research Center. The health impact of sleep deprivation has been the focus of research conducted by Eve Van Cauter and Rachel Leproult for more than 10 years.Special Heart Risks for Men
Men develop heart disease 10 years earlier, on average, than women do. They also have an early warning sign that few can miss: erectile dysfunction (ED). “It’s the canary in the coal mine,” says a Johns Hopkins expert. “Sexual problems often foretell heart problems.”
On the plus side, any risk factor—even ED—that gets your attention can put you on a path to better preventive care.
Heart Risk Factor: Erectile Dysfunction
“A lot of people think erectile dysfunction is the inability to get an erection at all, but an early sign of the condition is not being able to maintain an erection long enough to have satisfactory sexual intercourse,” says a Johns Hopkins expert. Erectile problems aren’t a normal part of getting older as many people think; rather, they almost always indicate a physical problem.
A key reason erectile dysfunction is considered a barometer for overall cardiovascular health is that the penis, like the heart, is a vascular organ. Because its arteries are much smaller than the heart’s, arterial damage shows up there first—often years ahead of heart disease symptoms. Men in their 40s who have erection problems (but no other risk factors for cardiovascular disease) run an 80 percent risk of developing heart problems within 10 years.
Treatment tends to be successful when started as soon as you begin to notice erection problems over more than a couple of months. An ED workup by a doctor will address heart disease risk factors, such as prediabetes, high blood pressure or excess weight — hopefully, long before they result in a heart attack or stroke.
Heart Risk Factor: Low Testosterone
Having a low testosterone level is often thought of as just a diminished sex drive, but it’s increasingly seen as being linked to heart disease and type 2 diabetes, the expert says. He notes that a growing body of research indicates that “low T” can be considered a cardiovascular and metabolic risk factor.
“These ideas are still being studied, but we know, for example, that people with abdominal obesity [so-called ‘belly fat’] or metabolic syndrome often have low testosterone,” the expert says. Metabolic syndrome (which includes high blood sugar levels, unhealthy cholesterol levels, and too much weight in the midsection) and diabetes are leading risk factors for heart disease.
Low testosterone is simply one part of an overall picture of heart risk, the expert says. But it can be motivating, even lifesaving, to know that changes in your sexual function are closely interrelated to the rest of your body. It’s worthwhile to get yourself checked out when something doesn’t seem right. “Men often don’t connect this problem to or get evaluated for stroke or heart attack risk until it happens,” he says. “But sexual problems are a message they listen to.”
Research Shows How Calcium Affects Sexual Health—and the Heart
Men who have high levels of calcification in their arteries are more likely to develop erectile dysfunction, according to a Johns Hopkins–led study of nearly 1,900 men, aged 59 to 64, who were followed for nine years. Calcification—calcium deposits in the arteries to the heart caused by damage—are a direct measure of blood vessel hardening, which indicates high cardiovascular disease risk. The men who were followed were heart-disease-free at the start of the study. Those found to develop heavy calcium buildup were 43 percent more likely to develop erectile problems down the road.
The study emphasizes the importance of coronary calcium screenings, which are CT scans that measure calcium buildup in heart arteries.
Heart Risk Factor: Stress
Stress, anger and anxiety raise levels of blood pressure and stress hormones, and they can restrict blood flow to the heart. Some damage can be immediate. In the two hours after an angry outburst, for example, your risk of a heart attack is nearly five times greater and your risk of stroke three times higher, research has shown.
What’s more, the effects of chronic stress can build over time, damaging arteries. Men who have angry or hostile personalities, in particular, have a higher risk of developing heart disease. Sexual problems related to heart disease can cause added anxiety or relationship stress. Stress can also affect sleep, which in turn affects heart health.
“Physical, emotional and psychological factors are all related when it comes to heart health,” says a Johns Hopkins expert. “When someone has chronic stress, depression or anxiety, they should have a basic evaluation of all of the risk factors for heart disease.”Notice: Users may be experiencing issues with displaying some pages on stanfordhealthcare.org. We are working closely with our technical teams to resolve the issue as quickly as possible. Thank you for your patience.
New to MyHealth?
Manage Your Care From Anywhere.
Access your health information from any device with MyHealth. You can message your clinic, view lab results, schedule an appointment, and pay your bill.
ALREADY HAVE AN ACCESS CODE?
DON'T HAVE AN ACCESS CODE?
NEED MORE DETAILS?
MyHealth for Mobile
Symptoms
Symptoms of Low Testosterone
Testosterone is a key hormone in normal male function. Low levels can lead to decreased:
- Energy
- Sex drive
- Mood
- Sleep
- Concentration
- Lean body mass
- Bone density
- Sperm production
Our Clinics
The Urology Clinic provides general urologic care for the local population and serves as a secondary and tertiary referral center for adult patients with a wide range of complex urologic problems.
We diagnose and treat patients with diseases of the endocrine system including adrenal, thyroid, bone, pituitary, and metabolic disorders.
We diagnose and treat patients with diseases of the endocrine system including adrenal, thyroid, bone, pituitary, and metabolic disorders.
RELATED CLINICS
Endocrinology Clinic in Pleasanton
5725 W Las Positas Blvd Ste 110
5725 W Las Positas Blvd
Ste 110
Pleasanton, CA 94588
Phone: 925-534-6500
Ste 110
Pleasanton, CA 94588
Phone: 925-534-6500Taking a multi-specialty approach to men’s health and wellness
Providing patients with the best urological care at the University of Rochester Medical Center (URMC) means implementing a multi-disciplinary approach to men’s health and wellness.
URMC’s Department of Urology explores problems with various organ systems to address men’s health more broadly – with the overall goal of improving overall health and quality of life. The Department engages health practitioners from a variety of disciplines within URMC to work as a team to implement this approach, ranging from urology to gerontology, cardiology, dermatology, nutrition and ophthalmology.
This interdisciplinary team takes its message about the importance of healthy aging out into the community. One example is the Urology Department’s annual Men’s Health Day conference. The 2022 event was held in June and featured presentations on such topics as skin cancer treatment and prevention, eye health, healthy aging, spine rehab, management of low testosterone and erectile dysfunction, and healthy eating.
“We held this year’s event close to Father’s Day, but we view every day as Father’s Day,” said Jean Joseph, M.D., M.B.A., chair of URMC’s Department of Urology. “Our core mission is community education to inform men what they need to do to promote their health as they age.”
“This interactive event has been invaluable for hundreds of men in our area, many of whom have attended for several years,” Joseph added. “We will continue to hold this important event for years to come, thanks to the generous support of a valued donor.”
Optimizing erectile function and testosterone levels
During his presentation on erectile dysfunction and low testosterone, J. Scott Gabrielsen, M.D., Ph.D., assistant professor - Department of Urology, focused as much on prevention of problems as on treatment. He highlighted that the best thing men can do to prevent these issues is to take care of their overall health.
The Department’s holistic approach recognizes that individual issues are not always independent of one another – and, in fact, they may be fully tied together. “What’s good for a man’s heart is good for their health, for their erections, for their testosterone and for their sperm quality,” Gabrielsen said. “For ED, lifestyle modification and medications changes can help men maintain and improve baseline function, whereas other treatments like sildenafil (Viagra) or tadalafil (Cialis) are Band-Aids to compensate for decreased function.”
According to Gabrielsen, ED and low testosterone are two issues that lead younger men to seek medical attention. This presents a unique opportunity to intervene and reinforce the importance of prevention, such as getting screened for diabetes.
“It’s important for men to understand that testosterone levels decrease with age, but most symptoms of low testosterone are due to other causes,” he added. “Improving overall health will have benefits not only for sexual function but will also help prevent a myriad of other health problems down the road.”
Urologists play a key role in healthy aging
While aging impacts everyone, there are specific health issues that arise that affect men physically, mentally and emotionally. Learning how to stay healthy longer was a large part of the Men’s Health Day discussion.
“We can’t stop aging, of course, but we can help men stay functional as long as possible,” said Timothy Holahan, DO, CMD, University of Rochester, Division of Geriatrics, Assistant Professor of Medicine, during his presentation on steps toward healthy aging. “Part of that effort is educating patients on such things as the impact of high cholesterol and high blood pressure on heart health.”
Helping men age healthier may not seem like the role of a urologist. Yet, because urologists care for male patient many times throughout their lives, they have more opportunities to engage with their patients.
“Urologists have a unique role in men’s health, and they have a greater impact on healthy aging than they probably realize,” Holahan said. “Following a man’s health for many years, a urologist may be able to pick up on other issues, such as memory loss or cognitive decline, which can be immensely helpful in overall patient care.”
“When looking at dementia, people think about how to prevent it or how to slow its progression. How you do that is by looking at a man’s health across the board – and that involves a urologist,” he added.
Food as more than fuel
When it comes to healthy eating, men often receive societal pressures to “achieve,” similar to many other areas of life, according to April Ho, R.D., C.P.T., a registered dietitian and certified personal trainer with URMC’s Center for Community Health & Prevention. Whether it is the pressure to achieve career status, financial success, or a diet that fuels the body and builds muscle, the cultural messaging often promotes productivity and black and white thinking.
“Seeing food as fuel and as a means of simply building muscle or losing weight misses the fact that for as long as the human race has been alive food has been part of ritual, social gathering and holidays as well,” Ho said. “Reducing food to solely its physical health benefits promotes an incomplete perspective that ultimately is often demotivating for patients.”
During the Men’s Health Day presentation, Ho covered the basics on healthy eating for retired men. This includes the need to eat from a portion plate that is equal parts fruit, vegetable, protein and starch, getting more calcium and vitamin D, and eating three servings of dairy and 30 grams of fiber and more each day.
While important to educate men about healthy eating, central to that is explaining the meaning of balance. Dietitians help patients understand tradeoffs they can make in their diets to make room for all their favorite foods.
“It is extremely valuable that we get to collaborate with urologists in an effort to reframe the all-or-nothing approach to healthy eating,” Ho added. “Dietitians can help men overcome the barriers to healthy eating – and to social and emotional health - because we get a good amount of time with our patients.”
As part of the inter-specialty approach, dieticians also work in tandem with the Department’s Comprehensive Kidney Stone Treatment Center on stone prevention.
“Our health care system is overtaxed, and patients demand and expect a lot from their providers,” Ho said. “Through our interdisciplinary approach, we are increasing collaboration among URMC departments and divisions, but, most importantly, we are improving patient outcomes immensely.”Low testosterone was once an embarrassing topic for men to discuss with their physicians. However, many men now seem to be more open about talking about their symptoms of low testosterone – including erectile dysfunction.
According to Nicole Ducharme, DO, Washington University specialist in endocrinology and internal medicine, “Erectile dysfunction (ED) is the predominant reason men consult their doctors. About 10 percent of ED is due to low testosterone, but ED itself has many causes. Other conditions such as vascular problems, hypertension, hyperlipidemia, diabetes, as well as depression and side-effects of medications can contribute. Adding testosterone may not correct the whole problem.”
Generally she says, low testosterone is not a problem for men under age 50. Screening below that age would be done for testosterone deficiency symptoms. To determine if low testosterone is a problem, doctors apply the Androgen Deficiency in Aging Males (ADAM) questionnaire. It has 10 areas that could indicate the need for testing. If a patient answers yes to decreased libido or erectile dysfunction, or answers yes to three or more questions, then testing for low testosterone is indicated.
- Do you have a decrease in sex drive (libido)?
- Do you have a lack of energy?
- Do you have a decrease in strength and/or endurance?
- Have you lost height?
- Have you noticed a decrease in enjoyment of life?
- Do you have mood swings, sadness or irritability?
- Do you have weaker penile erections?
- Have you noticed a deterioration in your ability to play sports?
- Are you falling asleep in early evening?
- Has there been a deterioration in your work performance?
There are more serious problems that can develop with exceptionally low levels of the hormone, including osteoporosis, muscle wasting, and a decrease in cognitive abilities and memory.
Dr. Ducharme says it’s not simply a matter of testing and treating. “Testosterone levels are highest in the early morning and lower in the afternoon. The range of normal is 250 to 800 ng/dl. In order to get an accurate measurement, levels should be taken between 8 and 10 am. If levels are less than 300, we would do another blood draw a week later.
As men get older, those fluctuations appear to flatten out. Normal testosterone levels also vary with age.”
The risks of testosterone replacement therapy include increase in PSA (prostate-specific antigen) and/or prostate size, increased liver function and increase in red blood cell count.
Dr. Ducharme says “Patients should be screened for obstructive sleep apnea prior to starting testosterone replacement. Treating testosterone in untreated sleep apnea patients could potentially have the side effect of elevated red blood cell count.”
You and your doctor should discuss which of the following therapies is right for you:
- Gel (applied daily after showering)
- Injection (every two to four weeks)
- Testosterone patch (changed daily)
- Intranasal spray
- Oral medication
If you have concerns about your testosterone levels, and would like to make an appointment with Dr. Ducharme, please call 314-333-4100.
University Internal Medicine and Diabetes Associates
Center for Advanced Medicine
4921 Parkview Place, Suite 13A
St. Louis, MO 63110
(314) 333-4100For most people, opening up about mental health isn’t fun. It can feel vulnerable, uncomfortable and — let’s be real — terrifying, especially if you have any dark thoughts.
And while many people struggle to talk about their mental health, data shows men aren’t talking enough about it.
“Men, especially middle-aged and older men, are the groups with the highest rates of suicides,” says Dr. John K. Amory, a physician at the General Internal Medicine Center at UW Medical Center – Roosevelt.
In fact, people aged 65 and older are more likely to die by suicide than any other age group — for both men and women.
So, what needs to change? Well, both men and their loved ones need to try to break the silence and begin talking about mental health — before it becomes don’t-do-or-die.
Men’s (mental) health crisis
Let’s be honest: Fewer men generally access their healthcare options than other genders, not because there aren’t resources, but because many men opt out of their routine healthcare.
“Some of my male patients are very good health advocates for themselves. Others are certainly … less so. In those cases, I do think there’s a mental construct of ‘self-sufficiency’ for some men that prevents them from asking for help,” says Amory.
In 2021, the overall life expectancy for men dropped from 74.2 years to 73.2 years. And to bring this back to mental health, the rate of suicide was the third-most reason for this decline in life expectancy, only behind deaths from COVID-19 and unintentional injuries.
Out of these causes of death, only one is entirely preventable, and that’s suicide.
Knowing the facts can help give some perspective on why this out-of-sight, out-of-mind perspective isn’t helping men’s mental health.
How mental health conditions affect men
According to Mental Health America, these top mental health problems affect men:
- Depression: over 6 million men suffer from depression.
- Anxiety: 14.3% of men have a form of anxiety disorder.
- Bipolar disorder: 2.9% of men have bipolar disorder.
- Psychosis and schizophrenia: 90% of those diagnosed with schizophrenia by age 30 are men.
- Eating disorders: 10% of patients with anorexia or bulimia are men, and 35% of patients with binge-eating disorder are men.
While these are the general statistics, the truth is, many men who suffer from mental health conditions or eating disorders remain undiagnosed, leading to their conditions worsening. It’s thought that the perceptions around gender and the way men are socialized from a young age are part of the issue.
This could mean that men mask their feelings of depression or anxiety because of the stigma around men and their emotions. Needing help isn’t seen as “masculine,” but suffering in silence shouldn’t be the answer. Men of color are even less likely to seek or receive help.
“There’s an ethos that men should ‘tough it out’ and that getting mental health care isn’t ‘manly.’ Obviously, this approach is not working,” says Amory.
It’s also untrue that men don’t want to talk about their mental health or other struggles. Because of these gender socializations and, sometimes, personal preferences, it’s just about creating the right environment to talk to men about their mental health in a way that feels safe and organic.
How to start the conversation
The research shows that many men cope with distressing emotions differently than other genders and are less likely to seek help.
If your loved one isn’t talking about his mental health issues, it can be hard to find a place to start. And while you might be coming from a place of worry, support and love, remember that this conversation isn’t about you or how you’re feeling. Steer clear of accusations around their actions or feelings, and instead, start with observations.
Tell them what you’ve been noticing. This can look like:
- I’ve noticed [behavior or feeling] lately and wanted to check in.
- When did you start feeling this way?
- How are you managing?
- Do you have anyone to talk to about this?
Validate how they’re feeling, but don’t offer advice. Instead, you can offer support and resources.
Suggest a trip to the doctor
Going to the doctor might not seem like mental health care, but it’s possible that a medical condition, such as low testosterone, could cause some symptoms of depression. Anxiety and other symptoms could also be side effects of medications or medical conditions, so a full workup is a great place to start.
If it’s his first appointment to talk about his mental health, offer to go with him. If he’d rather go alone, let him know you’re there for him when he needs support.
When patients come into Amory’s office with concerns, he says he tries to do a lot of the heavy work in facilitating the conversation to make his patients feel more comfortable.
“I often see men visibly relax after we start to discuss these issues openly,” says Amory.
But if the doctor doesn’t seem to be leading the conversation, encourage your loved one say something clear and honest like, “I’ve been having a lot of anxiety lately, and would like to know what my options are.”
Ask what he needs
Everyone opens up on their own terms and requires different methods of support. Don’t assume someone needs a specific type of help, such as medication or therapy. In addition, don’t be afraid to directly ask: Are you thinking about suicide? It’s a myth that the question will give them the idea. In fact, it could give them the much-needed opportunity to talk about their thoughts.
If he won’t open up
You can say and do all the right things, but at the end of the day, it’s up to your loved one to decide when they’re ready to open up and seek support for their mental health. Someone might not open up for a variety of reasons, from not knowing what to say, to shame or fear.
And while all of this might be frustrating, remember — this is about him, not how you’re feeling. Respect his decision to not open up, and in the meantime, you can continue to be a support by offering a safe space to talk when he’s ready, by spending quality time with him, or offering to help him with tasks.
Finally, if someone tells you they’re thinking about suicide, have an open and honest conversation. From there, you can work with them and their loved ones to decide the best course of action.
Your loved one can also call or text 988 if they are in crisis.
Talking about mental health is an extremely vulnerable act, but it can make a huge difference in someone’s life — it might even help save it.Testosterone
Definition
A testosterone test measures the amount of the male hormone, testosterone, in the blood. Both men and women produce this hormone.
The test described in this article measures the total amount of testosterone in the blood. Much of the testosterone in the blood is bound to a protein called sex hormone binding globulin (SHBG). Another blood test can measure the "free" testosterone. However, this type of test is often not very accurate.
Alternative Names
Serum testosterone
How the Test is Performed
A
How to Prepare for the Test
The health care provider may advise you to stop taking medicines that may affect the test.
How the Test will Feel
You may feel a slight prick or sting when the needle is inserted. There may be some throbbing afterward.
Why the Test is Performed
This test may be done if you have symptoms of abnormal male hormone (androgen) production.
In males, the testicles produce most of the testosterone in the body. Levels are most often checked to evaluate signs of abnormal testosterone such as:
- Early or late puberty (in boys)
- Infertility,
erectile dysfunction , low level of sexual interest, orthinning of the bones (in men)
In females, the ovaries produce most of the testosterone. The adrenal glands can also produce too much of other androgens that are converted to testosterone. Levels are most often checked to evaluate signs of higher testosterone levels, such as:
- Acne, oily skin
- Change in voice
- Decreased breast size
- Excess hair growth (dark, coarse hairs in the area of the moustache, beard, sideburns, chest, buttocks, inner thighs)
- Increased size of the clitoris
- Irregular or absent menstrual periods
- Male-pattern baldness or hair thinning
Normal Results
Normal measurements for these tests:
- Male: 300 to 1,000 nanograms per deciliter (ng/dL) or 10 to 35 nanomoles per liter (nmol/L)
- Female: 15 to 70 ng/dL or 0.5 to 2.4 nmol/L
The examples above are common measurements for results for these tests. Normal value ranges may vary slightly among different laboratories. Some labs use different measurements or test different specimens. Talk to your provider about the meaning of your specific test results.
What Abnormal Results Mean
Certain health conditions, medicines, or injury can lead to
Decreased total testosterone may be due to:
- Chronic illness
The pituitary gland does not produce normal amounts of some or all of its hormones- Problem with areas of the brain that control hormones (hypothalamus)
- Low thyroid function
- Delayed puberty
- Diseases of the testicles (trauma, cancer, infection, immune, iron overload)
- Benign tumor of the pituitary cells that produce too much of the hormone prolactin
- Too much body fat (obesity)
- Sleep problems (obstructive sleep apnea)
- Chronic stress from too much exercise (overtraining syndrome)
Increased total testosterone level may be due to:
- Resistance to the action of male hormones (androgen resistance)
- Tumor of the ovaries
- Cancer of the testes
Congenital adrenal hyperplasia - Taking medicines or drugs that increase testosterone level (including some supplements)
References
Chen Z, Legro RS, Ehrmann DA, Wei D. Androgen excess disorders in women. In: Robertson RP, ed. DeGroot's Endocrinology: Basic Science and Clinical Practice. 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2023:chap 124.
Haddad NG, Eugster EA. Endocrinology of pubertal disorders. In: Robertson RP, ed. DeGroot's Endocrinology: Basic Science and Clinical Practice. 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2023:chap 103.
Swerdloff RS, Wang C. The testis and male hypogonadism, infertility, and sexual dysfunction. In: Goldman L, Cooney KA, eds. Goldman-Cecil Medicine. 27th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2024:chap 216.
Review Date: 02/28/2024
The information provided herein should not be used during any medical emergency or for the diagnosis or treatment of any medical condition. A licensed physician should be consulted for diagnosis and treatment of any and all medical conditions. Call 911 for all medical emergencies. Links to other sites are provided for information only -- they do not constitute endorsements of those other sites. Copyright ©2019 A.D.A.M., Inc., as modified by University of California San Francisco. Any duplication or distribution of the information contained herein is strictly prohibited.
Information developed by A.D.A.M., Inc. regarding tests and test results may not directly correspond with information provided by UCSF Health. Please discuss with your doctor any questions or concerns you may have.Healthdirect Australia is not responsible for the content and advertising on the external website you are now entering.
Testosterone
9-minute read
Key facts
- Testosterone is a hormone that regulates sex drive and bone strength and helps make sperm.
- Testosterone levels are affected by your sex, age and overall health.
- Low testosterone levels can be caused by problems with your testes or pituitary gland, obesity, some health conditions or ageing.
- Low testosterone can affect your sex drive, erections, mood, sleep, energy levels and muscle strength.
- Testosterone replacement therapy and living a healthy lifestyle can also help raise levels.
What is testosterone?
Testosterone is a sex hormone that helps develop the male reproductive system including the penis, testes and prostate.
Males and females both naturally produce testosterone, though males produce far more than females. In males, most testosterone is made by the testes. In females, testosterone is made by the ovaries and converted to female sex hormones. It is also produced in the adrenal glands in both males and females.
Testosterone levels can vary greatly depending on your sex, age and health. Children usually have lower levels of testosterone that increase around puberty. In adults, levels gradually reduce with age.
What does testosterone do?
Testosterone is important in the development of the male reproductive organs, such as the testicles and penis.
It is responsible for the changes during puberty in males, such as:
- body hair
- a deeper voice
- stronger muscles
- growth spurts
- penis growth
- acne
In adult males, testosterone carries out important body functions, such as:
- regulating sex drive and mood
- regulating bone and muscle strength
- making new blood cells
- helping the testes make sperm
In females, testosterone is needed for bone and muscle strength and sex drive. Some of it is converted to a form of oestrogen.
What causes low testosterone?
Your body needs to maintain normal levels of testosterone for it to function properly.
Testosterone levels are controlled by a feedback loop between your brain, your pituitary gland and your testes. Sometimes your body can't make enough testosterone. This could be because your testes are not working properly, or because the pituitary gland in your brain is not telling your testes to make testosterone.
A low testosterone level is also known as androgen deficiency or hypogonadism.
There are many reasons that you may have low testosterone levels. Causes of low testosterone levels include:
- damage to your testicles — for example by an injury, undescended testes or an infection, such as mumps
- damage to your pituitary gland
- obesity
- genetic conditions, such as Klinefelter syndrome (XXY)
- chronic health conditions, such as diabetes and haemochromatosis
- tumours
- some medicines and cancer treatments
Low testosterone with ageing
Healthy older males may have lower testosterone levels due to the ageing process itself. This is generally not a medical concern.
Some people use the term 'andropause' or 'male menopause' to refer to the decline in testosterone with ageing. This term is misleading. It suggests that males don't have enough testosterone as they get older, however there is no clear evidence that this is a problem in healthy people.
You may have a greater drop in your testosterone levels if you have long-term medical conditions or if you are living with obesity. If low testosterone is a problem for you, you may want to speak to your doctor about whether it is simply because you are getting older or if there is another cause.
Use the BMI Calculator to find out if your weight and waist size are in a healthy range.
Low testosterone in females
The level of testosterone in females declines gradually until menopause. Lower levels of testosterone can also be due to:
- oral contraceptive pill use
- oral steroid therapy
- some medicines
- conditions that affect the pituitary gland
What are the symptoms of low testosterone?
Males with low testosterone levels can have many different symptoms. You might have:
- reduced libido
- problems getting and keeping erections
- changes in sleep patterns and poor sleep
- hot flushes
- lower energy levels
- low mood
- difficulty concentrating or remembering things
You may notice physical changes such as:
- increased body fat
- reduced muscle bulk and strength
- swollen or tender breasts
- less facial and body hair growth
You may also find out that you have infertility or decreased bone density.
Children with low testosterone levels might:
- have a small penis or testes
- have late puberty
- not grow facial or body hair or their voice might not break
Some females with low testosterone levels might have loss of libido.
CHECK YOUR SYMPTOMS — Use the Symptom Checker and find out if you need to seek medical help.
When should I see my doctor?
If you think that you have any of the symptoms of low testosterone you should talk to your doctor. They will ask you about your medical history, perform a physical examination and send you for a blood test. They may then refer you to an endocrinologist — a doctor who specialises in hormones.
If you are having difficulty becoming pregnant, you may want to talk to your doctor about the possibility of low testosterone levels.
ASK YOUR DOCTOR — Preparing for an appointment? Use the Question Builder for general tips on what to ask your GP or specialist.
How can I get my testosterone levels tested?
Your doctor can check your testosterone levels with a blood test, along with other hormones that might affect them. Testosterone levels can vary, so if you have a low level on one blood test, a second test is needed to confirm low levels.
It's best to have the blood test early in the morning while you are fasting. This is when your testosterone levels are usually at their highest.
Your doctor may also want to measure your iron levels to check for haemochromatosis. They may refer you for a genetic test called a karyotype to check for genetic conditions such as Klinefelter's syndrome.
FIND A HEALTH SERVICE — The Service Finder can help you find doctors, pharmacies, hospitals and other health services.
How is low testosterone treated?
If you have low testosterone, you can take testosterone replacement therapy. This is given by injections, gels, creams or tablets. Gels, creams and tablets are usually taken daily whereas injections are given every 3 months.
If there is an underlying cause for your low testosterone, it should be treated. You may also need testosterone therapy.
It's unclear whether testosterone therapy has any benefit for older males who have low testosterone but no testicular or pituitary problems. Getting diabetes or other health conditions under control and losing weight can improve testosterone levels.
If you are taking testosterone therapy, your doctor will regularly monitor your testosterone levels with blood tests. They may also check your bone health.
If you have prostate or breast cancer, or are planning to try to have a child, your doctor won't prescribe testosterone therapy. If you have fertility problems because of low testosterone levels, speak to your doctors about fertility treatments and other options.
You can also increase your testosterone levels by:
- getting regular exercise
- keeping stress to a minimum
- eating a healthy diet
- losing weight if you live with overweight or obesity
What are the complications of low testosterone levels?
If you have low testosterone levels, you are at a higher risk of developing osteoporosis and breaking your bones.
Testosterone replacement therapy can also cause side effects and complications, such as:
- acne or other skin reactions
- male pattern hair loss
- higher levels of red blood cells and prostate-specific antigen (PSA)
- reduced fertility in some people
Resources and support
Visit Healthy Male for more information about male reproductive and sexual health
Pathology Tests Explained also has more information on blood tests, including testosterone tests.
Talk to your doctor or call healthdirect on 1800 022 222 at any time to speak to a registered nurse (known as NURSE-ON-CALL in Victoria) for more information and advice.
Do you prefer to read in languages other than English?
Hormones Australia provides resources on hormone conditions, available in various languages.
Looking for information for Aboriginal and/or Torres Strait Islander people?
Find an Aboriginal Community Controlled Health Organisation (ACCHO) in your area.Testosterone & Heart Health: How Low T Affects Heart Disease Risk
Nov. 6, 2023A low sex drive and declining muscle mass are among men's primary concerns about low testosterone. But there are many reasons for a man to care about a decline in his testosterone levels.
The one he may not be considering is heart health.
"Testosterone deficiency has an unfavorable effect on cardiovascular health," says Dr. Khurram Nasir, a preventive cardiologist at Houston Methodist. "It can even be considered a risk factor for heart disease."
That's not good news for the 1 in 3 men aged 40 to 80 who suffer from low testosterone, or low T. The condition's development is made more likely by certain lifestyle factors and health conditions, including being overweight and having type 2 diabetes.
After age 30, notes Dr. Nasir, there's a steady decline in testosterone levels, about 1%-2% per year. While that's natural, he says some men experience a more exacerbated decline, resulting in early-onset testosterone deficiency.
Some of the best known symptoms of low testosterone — such as reduced libido, general fatigue, loss of muscle — are relatively straightforward. The link between the heart and low T is more complex.
Some studies have identified a cardioprotective effect of testosterone, while others report that the link between low T and heart disease isn't particularly clear. And you may recall the FDA issuing a warning about testosterone therapy several years ago, claiming that it may actually lead to heart problems.
It's enough to leave any man feeling confused about how testosterone affects the heart exactly. Fortunately, Dr. Nasir can help us sort through what's currently known about low T and testosterone therapy — and what both mean for heart health.
How low testosterone affects the heart
"Based on what we know about the association between testosterone deficiency and metabolic issues, impaired glucose metabolism, poor cholesterol levels and inflammation — all of which are themselves linked to heart disease — we can infer that testosterone deficiency is also associated with poor heart health," explains Dr. Nasir.
One of the most noticeable examples of this is erectile dysfunction (ED), the most common sexual problem men 40 and older report to their doctor. ED is often the result of poor blood circulation caused by atherosclerosis, when the arteries that supply the body with blood become narrowed due to plaque buildup. This link might be indirect, but it's why ED can actually be a warning sign of heart disease.
Many other connections between testosterone and heart health have been drawn, with studies showing that:
- Testosterone helps slow (and maybe even reverse) atherosclerosis
- Higher testosterone levels are associated with a decreased risk of heart disease in men over age 70
- Age-related declines in testosterone levels are associated with increased risk of heart disease
- Low T levels in men with congestive heart failure are associated with poorer disease outcomes
- Testosterone therapy can help lower cholesterol levels, thereby reducing the risk of atherosclerosis
"We also know that low T can be thought of as a biomarker of poor overall health," says Dr. Nasir. "And when your overall health is poor, you're more likely to have poor cardiovascular health."
More evidence is needed to clearly define the link between low T and heart disease, but most cardiologists agree that taking steps to keep testosterone levels healthy is important for promoting good heart health.
(Related: 5 All-Natural Ways to Boost Your Testosterone)
Is testosterone therapy safe for the heart?
The most common reason to consider testosterone therapy is to reduce those obviously troublesome symptoms of low T, such as ED. But there are more upsides to this therapy. Testosterone replacement can also benefit waist circumference, lean muscle mass, type 2 diabetes, metabolic syndrome and more.
But does it reduce the risk of heart disease? And what should we make of the warnings that testosterone therapy might actually negatively impact the heart?
"It's complicated," says Dr. Nasir. "Over ten years ago, a few early studies suggested that testosterone replacement therapy might increase a man's risk of experiencing a cardiovascular event, like heart attack and stroke. But that evidence was incredibly controversial."
Dr. Nasir adds that these studies either weren't designed to specifically assess such a risk or were retrospective studies that weren't well controlled. An FDA committee evaluating the studies even stated that the evidence against the therapy was insufficient.
Despite this, the agency issued a warning of prescription testosterone therapy in 2014.
"Fast forward to today — a large trial designed to solely and thoroughly assess the cardiovascular safety of testosterone replacement therapy recently found no difference in the risk of adverse cardiovascular events in men taking the therapy versus those not taking it," says Dr. Nasir. "The trial did find, however, that arrhythmia risk may be slightly higher while on testosterone replacement, which has implications for how we think about treating testosterone deficiency."
Dr. Nasir points out that only men who need the therapy should be considered for it, but it's also important to understand a man's risk of heart disease before prescribing testosterone therapy.
"We need to take the guesswork out of measuring a person's cardiovascular risk, and to do that we use the coronary artery calcium (CAC) test," adds Dr. Nasir. "This is safe, noninvasive test we can use to very accurately predict risk."
(Related: Calcium Score: What Is a CAC Test?)
The first step for men who suspect they have low testosterone is a blood test. Someone whose levels are low and who also has a low risk of heart disease likely can be prescribed testosterone therapy without much concern. But a man with low T whose cardiovascular risk is high will need to consider whether the therapy is a safe treatment option.
How to boost testosterone levels and protect your heart
Testosterone levels naturally decrease with age. That's something you can't change.
But certain lifestyle factors amplify this decline. And many of those factors are also ones that increase heart disease risk. This means that the same behaviors that help support normal testosterone levels also promote a healthier heart.
The lifestyle behaviors that can help improve both testosterone levels and heart health include:
- Eating a healthy diet
- Being physically active
- Keeping a healthy weight
- Managing blood sugar, blood pressure and cholesterol levels
"And, certainly, if you have low T or are experiencing symptoms of low T, it's important to see a cardiologist for a full evaluation of your cardiovascular health," adds Dr. Nasir. "Despite some of the unknowns, what we know for sure is that low T can be a warning sign for heart disease."Have you seen the TV commercials for testosterone boosters? They’ll make you think these over-the-counter products will have your muscles bulging and your sex drive humming. Some commercials say that the supplements will help you become “the man you used to be.”
But you’d be hard-pressed to find a urologist recommending these gimmicky, untested products. Still, testosterone is important to a man’s health, says UNC Health urologist Marc J. Rogers, MD. Here’s the real deal about why, and what to do if you’re concerned about low testosterone.
What Testosterone Does in the Body
Testosterone is the male sex hormone. It’s responsible for facial hair, muscle mass, growth of the penis and testicles, and sex drive. It helps the testicles produce sperm and the penis to become erect.
Around age 12 or 13, the pituitary gland signals the testicles to start producing testosterone. Testosterone production may start to ebb around age 50, but the clinical data is inconclusive, says Dr. Rogers.
Maintaining normal testosterone levels throughout a man’s life can support his sex drive and fertility, and build the strength of his muscles and bones.
Testosterone Levels: What They Mean
The most common symptoms of low testosterone are low libido (sex drive), erectile dysfunction, decreased energy levels, decreased muscle mass and brain fog, characterized by a lack of focus and mental clarity, Dr. Rogers says. The American Urological Association estimates that 20 to 50 percent of men have testosterone deficiency.
However, these symptoms are often caused by other things, including poor sleep habits, sleep apnea, diabetes, cardiovascular disease, obesity, and depression or anxiety, he says.
Your doctor will help you decide if measuring your testosterone levels is important. Blood tests are the only way to know for certain if testosterone levels are low. The normal range is above 300 nanograms per deciliter (ng/dL). Two blood tests on separate days must show low testosterone levels before a diagnosis is confirmed.
If a man’s testosterone is below 300 ng/dL, his doctor may prescribe testosterone replacement therapy.
“If a doctor prescribes testosterone replacement therapy and the patient’s levels normalize, but their symptoms don’t improve, then there’s likely another cause,” he says.
How to Treat Symptoms Associated with Low Testosterone
First, make sure you are sleeping well. Get treatment for sleep apnea, try to get diabetes and high blood pressure under control, and try to lose weight if you are obese. Moderate exercise is also helpful.
If these steps don’t control symptoms associated with low testosterone, then your doctor may prescribe testosterone replacement medicines. These are available only by prescription, so beware of ads or offers of testosterone supplements available over the counter or through the mail.
“These ‘testosterone boosters’ are not FDA regulated,” he says, “so it’s tough to gauge whether the ingredients listed on the label are really in the bottle.”
If you and your doctor determine that you need testosterone replacement therapy, the medicine comes in different forms, including:
- A topical gel, applied daily on the shoulders
- Injections men can give themselves daily at home in a leg muscle
- Nasal sprays, taken two or three times a day
- Tablets taken by mouth twice a day
- Pellets inserted by a doctor into fat tissue every three months
- Injections given by a clinician every 10 weeks
Pellets and long-lasting injections may provide more stable testosterone levels over the long term, Dr. Rogers says, and can be more convenient than daily self-treatments.
Alternatively, your doctor may prescribe a medicine (clomiphene citrate) that increases hormones produced by the pituitary gland, which stimulate testosterone production in the testicles.
Who Should Not Get Testosterone Replacement?
While testosterone is necessary for producing sperm, Dr. Rogers says, external testosterone replacement will lower sperm counts.
“It is not accurate that testosterone replacement will improve fertility issues,” he says. Talk to your urologist about how to identify and treat male fertility problems.
Talk to Your Doctor About Testosterone Levels
“Men should see their primary care physicians every year to check blood pressure, cholesterol levels, diabetes risks and other general health indicators,” he says. “Testosterone levels are not a standard part of that workup panel. It’s only checked if the person has symptoms.”
Erectile dysfunction and loss of muscle mass can prompt a testosterone blood test. A primary care physician may refer a patient to a specialist, such as a urologist or endocrinologist, for testing and treatment.
“Men of all ages can experience symptoms of low testosterone,” Dr. Rogers says. “It’s not just men over 50. It can be low at age 25, too.”
Also, some boys who are delayed entering puberty (after age 14) may also benefit from testosterone injections. First, other problems, including isolated gonadotropin deficiency (a lifelong deficiency of certain puberty hormones), should be ruled out.
If you are having symptoms of low testosterone, talk to your doctor or find one near you.Definition
A testosterone test measures the amount of the male hormone, testosterone, in the blood. Both men and women produce this hormone.
The test described in this article measures the total amount of testosterone in the blood. Much of the testosterone in the blood is bound to a protein called sex hormone binding globulin (SHBG). Another blood test can measure the "free" testosterone. However, this type of test is often not very accurate.
How the Test is Performed
A blood sample is taken from a vein. The best time for the blood sample to be taken is between 7 a.m. and 10 a.m. A second sample is often needed to confirm a result that is lower than expected.
How to Prepare for the Test
The health care provider may advise you to stop taking medicines that may affect the test.
How the Test will Feel
You may feel a slight prick or sting when the needle is inserted. There may be some throbbing afterward.
Why the Test is Performed
This test may be done if you have symptoms of abnormal male hormone (androgen) production.
In males, the testicles produce most of the testosterone in the body. Levels are most often checked to evaluate signs of abnormal testosterone such as:
In females, the ovaries produce most of the testosterone. The adrenal glands can also produce too much of other androgens that are converted to testosterone. Levels are most often checked to evaluate signs of higher testosterone levels, such as:
- Acne, oily skin
- Change in voice
- Decreased breast size
- Excess hair growth (dark, coarse hairs in the area of the moustache, beard, sideburns, chest, buttocks, inner thighs)
- Increased size of the clitoris
- Irregular or absent menstrual periods
- Male-pattern baldness or hair thinning
Normal Results
Normal measurements for these tests:
- Male: 300 to 1,000 nanograms per deciliter (ng/dL) or 10 to 35 nanomoles per liter (nmol/L)
- Female: 15 to 70 ng/dL or 0.5 to 2.4 nmol/L
The examples above are common measurements for results for these tests. Normal value ranges may vary slightly among different laboratories. Some labs use different measurements or test different specimens. Talk to your provider about the meaning of your specific test results.
What Abnormal Results Mean
Certain health conditions, medicines, or injury can lead to low testosterone. The testosterone level also naturally drops with age. Low testosterone can affect sex drive, mood, and muscle mass in men.
Decreased total testosterone may be due to:
- Chronic illness
- The pituitary gland does not produce normal amounts of some or all of its hormones
- Problem with areas of the brain that control hormones (hypothalamus)
- Low thyroid function
- Delayed puberty
- Diseases of the testicles (trauma, cancer, infection, immune, iron overload)
- Benign tumor of the pituitary cells that produce too much of the hormone prolactin
- Too much body fat (obesity)
- Sleep problems (obstructive sleep apnea)
- Chronic stress from too much exercise (overtraining syndrome)
Increased total testosterone level may be due to:
- Resistance to the action of male hormones (androgen resistance)
- Tumor of the ovaries
- Cancer of the testes
- Congenital adrenal hyperplasia
- Taking medicines or drugs that increase testosterone level (including some supplements)
References
Chen Z, Legro RS, Ehrmann DA, Wei D. Androgen excess disorders in women. In: Robertson RP, ed. DeGroot's Endocrinology: Basic Science and Clinical Practice. 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2023:chap 124.
Haddad NG, Eugster EA. Endocrinology of pubertal disorders. In: Robertson RP, ed. DeGroot's Endocrinology: Basic Science and Clinical Practice. 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2023:chap 103.
Swerdloff RS, Wang C. The testis and male hypogonadism, infertility, and sexual dysfunction. In: Goldman L, Cooney KA, eds. Goldman-Cecil Medicine. 27th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2024:chap 216.Locations:
AdvertisementAdvertisement
Testosterone is a hormone that your gonads (testicles or ovaries) mainly produce. Testosterone levels are naturally much higher in males. If testosterone levels are too high or too low, it can cause certain symptoms.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services. Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Testosterone is a hormone that your gonads (sex organs) mainly produce. More specifically, both testicles and ovaries produce testosterone.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services. Policy
Your adrenal glands also produce the hormone dehydroepiandrosterone (DHEA), which your body transforms into testosterone and estrogen.
Testosterone is the main androgen, meaning it stimulates the development of male characteristics. Levels of testosterone are naturally much higher in males.
Natural testosterone is a steroid — an anabolic-androgenic steroid. "Anabolic" refers to muscle building, and "androgenic" refers to increased male sex characteristics.
However, when you hear people use the term “anabolic steroids” they are generally referring to synthetic (made in a lab) variations of testosterone that are injected into your body.
Healthcare providers use synthetic testosterone to treat and manage various medical conditions.
Synthetic testosterone is the main drug of masculinizing hormone therapy.
Some athletes and bodybuilders misuse synthetic testosterone (anabolic steroids) by taking very high doses of them in an attempt to boost performance or change their physical appearance. Misuse of these drugs can cause several unpleasant symptoms and lead to long-term dangerous health problems, including blood clots, stroke, and potentially increase the risk of prostate cancer.
Testosterone has different roles in different life stages, including:
Advertisement
- Fetal development.
- Puberty for male children.
- Adulthood.
At around week seven in utero, the sex-related gene on the Y chromosome initiates the development of the testicles in male infants. The testicles produce testosterone.
Testosterone triggers the development of the male internal and external reproductive organs during fetal development.
Testosterone is responsible for many of the changes seen in pubescent males, including:
- An increase in height.
- Body and pubic hair growth.
- Enlargement of their penis, testes and prostate gland.
- Increasing libido (sex drive).
Testosterone is essential for the production of sperm. It also:
- Signals your body to make new red blood cells.
- Ensures that your bones and muscles stay strong.
- Enhances libido (sex drive) and a sense of well-being.
For adult females, testosterone enhances libido. However, the majority of testosterone produced in the ovaries is converted to the primary female sex hormone, estradiol.
Your body controls the levels of testosterone in your blood. Levels are usually highest in the morning and decline during the day.
Your hypothalamus and pituitary gland control the amount of testosterone your gonads (testicles or ovaries) produce and release.
Your hypothalamus releases gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH), which triggers your pituitary gland to release luteinizing hormone (LH). LH then travels to your gonads and stimulates the production and release of testosterone. (LH more often stimulates the production of estrogen and progesterone in ovaries.)
As testosterone in your blood increases, it suppresses the production of gonadotropin-releasing hormone, which helps maintain normal levels of testosterone.
If any of these organs — your hypothalamus, pituitary gland or gonads — aren’t working normally, that can cause abnormal testosterone levels.
If your healthcare provider suspects you may have irregular testosterone levels, they may order one or more tests, including:
- Total testosterone blood test (this is usually performed in the morning since testosterone levels are highest then).
- Follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) blood test.
- Luteinizing hormone (LH) blood test.
The two charts below list the general normal ranges of testosterone based on age and sex. The level is measured in nanograms per deciliter (ng/dL).
It’s important to note that the normal ranges for testosterone levels can vary based on the type of blood test done and the laboratory where it is done. Your provider will always reference your laboratory’s normal ranges when interpreting your results. Talk to them if you have questions.
Advertisement
Normal testosterone levels for males:
Normal testosterone levels for females:
Several conditions can cause your body to produce too much testosterone, including:
- Polycystic ovarian syndrome (PCOS): This is a hormonal imbalance that affects people with ovaries. It happens when the ovaries create excess androgens (testosterone). This imbalance in reproductive hormones causes physical symptoms like excess body hair and weight gain.
- Congenital adrenal hyperplasia: In CAH, genetic mutations (changes) cause shortages of enzymes in the adrenal gland. These enzymes normally help the body to produce cortisol, a hormone the body needs to respond to stress. When the enzymes don’t work normally, the adrenal glands produce an excess of testosterone and other hormones instead of cortisol.
- Ovarian or testicular tumors: Androgen-producing ovarian and testicular tumors can release excess testosterone.
- Adrenal tumors: Sex-hormone-producing adrenal tumors are rare tumors that make too much androgen (testosterone), estrogen or both.
Excess testosterone affects your body differently depending on your sex and age.
It’s unlikely — and difficult to tell — that a male adult has higher-than-normal levels of testosterone.
Advertisement
Excess testosterone in male children can lead to precocious (early) puberty, which is when puberty begins before the age of nine.
High levels of testosterone in female infants may lead to enlargement of their clitoris that can look almost like a penis. It can also lead to precocious (early) puberty, which is when puberty begins before the age of eight.
In female adults, high levels of testosterone may be a sign of polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS). This condition is very common — up to 15% of females of reproductive age have it.
PCOS causes certain symptoms, including:
- Acne.
- Excess body and facial hair (hirsutism).
- Irregular menstruation (periods).
- Balding at the front of your hairline.
- Deeper voice.
Lower-than-normal testosterone levels typically only cause symptoms in males. This condition is called male hypogonadism.
There are two main types of male hypogonadism: classical (congenital or acquired) and late-onset.
Classical male hypogonadism is when low testosterone levels are due to an underlying medical condition or damage to your testicles, pituitary gland or hypothalamus. For example, a person can be born with a condition (congenital) that leads to low testosterone, such as Klinefelter syndrome or Kallmann syndrome, or they can develop it later (acquired), such as from an something that changes the normal functioning of their testicles, hypothalamus or pituitary gland.
Advertisement
Late-onset male hypogonadism happens when the decline in testosterone levels is linked to general aging and/or age-related conditions, particularly obesity and Type 2 diabetes. Late-onset hypogonadism affects about 2% of men over the age of 40.
The symptoms of low testosterone vary based on your age.
Testosterone deficiency during fetal development doesn’t allow male characteristics to develop normally. This is called androgen insensitivity syndrome (AIS) and occurs when someone is genetically male but is insensitive to androgens (male sex hormones).
AIS is a disorder of sex differentiation. It affects male fetuses as they develop in the uterus, as well as teenage sexual development during puberty. AIS prevents male genitals from developing as they should and almost always results in infertility (it’s difficult or impossible to father children) during adulthood.
For male children, testosterone deficiency during puberty can result in the following:
- Slowed growth in height, but their arms and legs may continue to grow out of proportion with the rest of their body.
- Reduced development of pubic hair.
- Reduced growth of their penis and testicles.
- Less voice deepening.
- Lower-than-normal strength and endurance.
Testosterone levels in males naturally decline with age. However, adult males can experience even lower testosterone levels, which can lead to the following:
- Unexplained reduction in muscle mass and an increase in body fat.
- Loss of body hair.
- Depressed mood.
- Erectile dysfunction.
- Low sex drive.
- Osteoporosis (weak bones).
- Difficulty with concentration and memory.
If you think you may have symptoms of low testosterone or excess testosterone, talk to your healthcare provider. They can order some tests or send you to a specialist.
Testosterone is an essential part of reproductive health. It’s natural for testosterone levels to vary depending on your age and overall health. If they’re consistently high or low, you may experience unpleasant symptoms worth discussing with your provider. Treatments are available that may help.
Hormonal conditions can be tricky to find and complicated to treat. The experts in endocrinology at Cleveland Clinic are here to provide the best care.
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 09/01/2022.
Learn more about the Health Library and our editorial process.
AdvertisementAdvertisement
Ad
Rendered: Sun Oct 19 2025 04:47:43 GMT+0000 (Coordinated Universal Time)What is Testosterone Deficiency, what are the symptoms and how is it diagnosed?
Testosterone Deficiency is often under-recognised and under-diagnosed despite its vital role in both physical and psychological health. Healthy testosterone levels are essential for energy, mood, sexual function, muscle mass, and overall wellbeing – there is no benefit to living with low levels.
Symptoms can include low energy, reduced libido, erectile dysfunction, depression, brain fog, and loss of muscle. Because these overlap with other conditions, proper diagnosis requires thorough symptom assessment and blood tests following clinical guidelines.
Early recognition and treatment are key. Testosterone Replacement Therapy can restore hormone balance and improve quality of life for men with confirmed deficiency.
Browse:
Browse:
Testosterone Deficiency is a recognised medical condition with established UK guidelines for diagnosis and treatment. Low testosterone can significantly impact both short-term and long-term physical and psychological health, yet it remains under-recognised and under-diagnosed. At The Men’s Health Clinic, we are committed to raising awareness and improving understanding so more men can access safe, effective care.
Testosterone Deficiency is defined as:
“Testosterone Deficiency can adversely affect multiple organ systems and result in significant decreases in quality of life, including changes in sexual function.” – The British Society for Sexual Medicine Guidelines on Male Adult Testosterone Deficiency, with Statements for Practice (2023)
Terms like ‘Male Menopause’ and ‘Andropause’ are misleading and trivialise a condition that can profoundly affect both quality and length of life. Just as we would never deny insulin to a diabetic or effective medication to a hypothyroid patient, the same standard should apply to Testosterone Deficiency.
It’s important to recognise that many symptoms commonly attributed to low testosterone may have other causes. Therefore, a thorough medical history, physical examination, and appropriate blood tests are essential to explore all possible diagnoses before confirming Testosterone Deficiency.
Common symptoms associated with low testosterone include:
Restoring male androgen levels often leads to significant improvements in mental well-being. Many patients report reduced reliance on antidepressants following effective therapy.
Persistent tiredness can be debilitating and is often dismissed as “normal aging.” Testosterone Replacement Therapy (TRT) usually enhances energy, motivation, and drive, helping you move forward with renewed vitality.
Difficulty concentrating, muddled thinking, or short-term memory loss are frequent complaints. TRT can clear this cognitive fog, helping you feel mentally sharp again.
Reduced sexual desire is common, with many men describing a loss of their usual “spark.” Testosterone plays a central role in maintaining sexual drive.
Problems with erections, including the loss of morning erections, can be embarrassing but are important indicators of underlying hormonal imbalance.
While less commonly reported initially, reduced muscle mass and strength signal a decline from your previous physical state. Normalising testosterone can help restore muscle tone and strength.
Difficulty losing weight despite a healthy lifestyle is a frequent complaint. TRT often improves body composition over time, aiding fat loss and muscle gain.
Reduced bone density is a serious concern that may be overlooked. Testosterone is vital for maintaining bone strength and preventing fractures.
By identifying these symptoms early and investigating thoroughly, appropriate treatment can be initiated to improve both quality of life and long-term health.
When investigating the possibility of Testosterone Deficiency, we recommend a comprehensive diagnostic blood test, which can be arranged through our clinic if needed. These tests should be performed between 07:00 and 11:00, in a fasted state, and not during any acute illness to ensure accuracy. A second, simpler confirmatory test is required approximately four weeks later to validate the diagnosis.
A full diagnostic blood panel typically includes:
- Total Testosterone
- Free Testosterone
- Follicle Stimulating Hormone (FSH)
- Luteinising Hormone (LH)
- Sex Hormone Binding Globulin (SHBG)
- Prolactin
- Oestradiol
- Full Blood Count
- Prostate Specific Antigen (PSA)
- Urea & Electrolytes
- Liver Function Tests
- HbA1c
- Lipid Profile including Cholesterol
- Thyroid Function Tests
This comprehensive testing is essential not only to confirm testosterone deficiency but also to identify potentially reversible causes and exclude contraindications to therapy. To support our clinical evaluation, we also use validated pre-screening tools such as the Aging Male Symptoms Scale, providing a quantitative baseline for symptom assessment.
Testosterone Replacement Therapy (TRT) should only be prescribed when clinically indicated and after a thorough discussion between you and your clinician. TRT is generally considered a lifelong treatment, and the decision to start therapy should carefully weigh the benefits and risks tailored to your individual health needs.
The British Society for Sexual Medicine (BSSM) has published national UK guidelines, based on the latest evidence, to support doctors in providing safe and effective care for patients with confirmed Testosterone Deficiency. Key excerpts from these guidelines include:
“Serum testosterone should be measured between 7 and 11 AM on at least two occasions, preferably four weeks apart, using a reliable method and not during acute illness.”
“Regarding the thresholds for treatment intervention in symptomatic men, BSSM and ISSM guidelines recommend the following:
TT level lower than 8 nmol/L or FT level lower than 180pmol/L (<0.180 nmol/L; based on 2 separate levels from 8 to 11 AM) usually requires T therapy.
Levels from 8 to 12 nmol/L might require a trial of T therapy for a minimum of 6 months based on symptoms.
A FT level lower than 225 pmol/L (0.225 nmol/L) provides supportive evidence for T therapy in the presence of appropriate symptoms.”
Despite this clear guidance, Testosterone Deficiency remains poorly understood among many UK doctors, making access to treatment via the NHS challenging. Often, general practitioners refer patients to local endocrinology services, where adherence to BSSM guidelines is inconsistent. Many endocrinologists rely on their laboratory’s reference ranges and only treat hormone levels considered ‘abnormal,’ which can exclude patients within the lower end of normal who still suffer symptoms.
Reference ranges vary regionally and have been trending downward, reflecting broader public health concerns. While life expectancy may be increasing, overall quality of life often does not improve accordingly.
The Society for Endocrinology’s recent statement on “Male Hypogonadism and Ageing” highlights that hypogonadism is “misdiagnosed, over-diagnosed, and undiagnosed in equal measures.” This underscores the critical need for a thorough and specialist diagnostic assessment by clinicians who prioritise patient-centred care and fully understand the complexities of Testosterone Deficiency.
Speak to our team, book online or email us with any questions that you may have.Attention: Restrictions on use of AUA, AUAER, and UCF content in third party applications, including artificial intelligence technologies, such as large language models and generative AI.
You are prohibited from using or uploading content you accessed through this website into external applications, bots, software, or websites, including those using artificial intelligence technologies and infrastructure, including deep learning, machine learning and large language models and generative AI.
Evaluation and Management of Testosterone Deficiency (2024)
Using AUA Guidelines
This AUA guideline is provided free of use to the general public for academic and research purposes. However, any person or company accessing AUA guidelines for promotional or commercial use must obtain a licensed copy. To obtain the licensable copy of this guideline, please contact Keith Price at kprice@auanet.org.
Published 2018, Reviewed and Validity Confirmed 2024
To cite this guideline:
Mulhall JP, Trost LW, Brannigan RE et al: Evaluation and management of testosterone deficiency: AUA guideline. J Urol 2018; 200: 423.
The Evaluation and Management of Testosterone Deficiency AUA Guideline provides guidance to the practicing clinician on how to diagnose, treat and monitor the adult male with testosterone deficiency. The care of testosterone deficient patients should focus on accurate assessment of testosterone levels, symptoms and signs as well as proper on-treatment monitoring to ensure therapeutic testosterone levels are reached and symptoms are ameliorated. Guidance is also given on the management of patients with cardiovascular disease, men who are interested in preserving their fertility and men who are at risk for or have prostate cancer.
Guideline as it appears in The Journal of Urology® [pdf]
Unabridged version of this Guideline [pdf]
Español translated guideline courtesy of Confederacion Americana de Urologia (CAU) [pdf]
Algorithm associated with this guideline: Diagnostic [pdf]
Algorithm associated with this guideline: Treatment [pdf]
Table 1: AUA Nomenclature [pdf]
Table 2: Dosing Profiles of Testosterone Formulations [pdf]
Table 3: Prevalence of Testosterone Deficiency [pdf]
Table 4: Lab Assays for the Diagnosis of Testosterone Deficiency [pdf]
Table 5: Symptoms and Signs of Testosterone Deficiency [pdf]
Table 6: Alternative Therapies [pdf]
Table 7: Follow-up Laboratory Testing
Table 8: Adjunctive Testing [pdf]
Panel Members
John P. Mulhall, MD; Landon W. Trost, MD; Robert E. Brannigan, MD; Emily G. Kurtz, MD; J. Bruce Redmon, MD; Kelly A. Chiles, MD, MSc; Deborah J. Lightner, MD; Martin M. Miner, MD; M. Hassan Murad, MD, MPH; Christian J. Nelson, PhD; Elizabeth A. Platz, ScD, MPH; Lakshmi V. Ramanathan, PhD; Ronald W. Lewis, MD
Executive Summary
Testosterone testing and prescriptions have nearly tripled in recent years; however, it is clear from clinical practice that there are many men using testosterone without a clear indication.1-3 Some studies estimate that up to 25% of men who receive testosterone therapy do not have their testosterone tested prior to initiation of treatment.2, 3 Of men who are treated with testosterone, nearly half do not have their testosterone levels checked after therapy commences.2, 3 While up to a third of men who are placed on testosterone therapy do not meet the criteria to be diagnosed as testosterone deficient,2, 3 there are a large percentage of men in need of testosterone therapy who fail to receive it due to clinician concerns, mainly surrounding prostate cancer development and cardiovascular events, although current evidence fails to definitively support these concerns. Given the clinical and commercial testosterone landscape, the American Urological Association (AUA) identified a need to produce an evidence-based document that informs clinicians on the proper assessment and management of patients with testosterone deficiency. The AUA and the Testosterone Panel were committed to creating a Guideline that ensures that men in need of testosterone therapy are treated effectively and safely.
Methodology
A systematic review utilized research from the Mayo Clinic Evidence Based Practice Center and additional supplementation by the authors. Literature searches included Ovid Medline In-Process & Other Non-Indexed Citations, Ovid MEDLINE, Ovid EMBASE, Ovid Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials, Ovid Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews, and Scopus. Controlled vocabulary supplemented with keywords was used to search for studies according to each defined question. This search included articles published between January 1, 1980 – February 6, 2017 and yielded 15,217 references, 546 (enrolling approximately 350,000 men) of which were used to support guideline statements.
An updated evidence search was subsequently performed in 2022. The original guideline search strategy was updated and used to systematically search PubMed for new evidence published between the previous search end date and February 2022. This search covered the topic areas of all Key Questions listed previously. The literature search returned 11,537 citations after deduplication. During title first pass review, 11,060 citations were excluded. In second pass, an additional 419 studies were excluded.
When sufficient evidence existed, the body of evidence for a particular treatment was assigned a strength rating of A (high), B (moderate) or C (low) for support of Strong, Moderate, or Conditional Recommendations. In the absence of sufficient evidence, additional information is provided as Clinical Principles and Expert Opinions.
Guideline Statements
Diagnosis of Testosterone Deficiency
1. Clinicians should use a total testosterone level below 300 ng/dL as a reasonable cut-off in support of the diagnosis of low testosterone. (Moderate Recommendation; Evidence Level: Grade B)
2. The diagnosis of low testosterone should be made only after two total testosterone measurements are taken on separate occasions with both conducted in an early morning fashion. (Strong Recommendation; Evidence Level: Grade A)
3. The clinical diagnosis of testosterone deficiency is only made when patients have low total testosterone levels combined with symptoms and/or signs.(Moderate Recommendation; Evidence Level: Grade B)
4. Clinicians should consider measuring total testosterone in patients with a history of unexplained anemia, bone density loss, diabetes, exposure to chemotherapy, exposure to testicular radiation, HIV/AIDS, chronic narcotic use, male infertility, pituitary dysfunction, and chronic corticosteroid use even in the absence of symptoms or signs associated with testosterone deficiency. (Moderate Recommendation; Evidence Level: Grade B)
5. The use of validated questionnaires is not currently recommended to either define which patients are candidates for testosterone therapy or to monitor symptom response in patients on testosterone therapy. (Conditional Recommendation; Evidence Level: Grade C)
Adjunctive Testing
6. In patients with low testosterone, clinicians should measure serum luteinizing hormone levels. (Strong Recommendation; Evidence Level: Grade A)
7. Serum prolactin levels should be measured in patients with low testosterone levels combined with low or low/normal luteinizing hormone levels. (Strong Recommendation; Evidence Level: Grade A)
8. Patients with persistently high prolactin levels of unknown etiology should undergo evaluation for endocrine disorders. (Strong Recommendation; Evidence Level: Grade A)
9. Serum estradiol should be measured in testosterone deficient patients who present with breast symptoms or gynecomastia prior to the commencement of testosterone therapy. (Expert Opinion)
10. Men with testosterone deficiency who are interested in fertility should have a reproductive health evaluation performed prior to treatment. (Moderate Recommendation; Evidence Level: Grade B)
11. Prior to offering testosterone therapy, clinicians should measure hemoglobin and hematocrit and inform patients regarding the increased risk of polycythemia. (Strong Recommendation; Evidence Level: Grade A)
12. PSA should be measured in men over 40 years of age prior to commencement of testosterone therapy to exclude a prostate cancer diagnosis. (Clinical Principle)
Counseling Regarding Treatment of Testosterone Deficiency
13. Clinicians should inform testosterone deficient patients that low testosterone is a risk factor for cardiovascular disease. (Strong Recommendation; Evidence Level: Grade B)
14. Patients should be informed that testosterone therapy may result in improvements in erectile function, low sex drive, anemia, bone mineral density, lean body mass, and/or depressive symptoms. (Moderate Recommendation; Evidence Level: Grade B)
15. Patients should be informed that the evidence is inconclusive whether testosterone therapy improves cognitive function, measures of diabetes, energy, fatigue, lipid profiles, and quality of life measures. (Moderate Recommendation; Evidence Level: Grade B)
16. The long-term impact of exogenous testosterone on spermatogenesis should be discussed with patients who are interested in future fertility. (Strong Recommendation; Evidence Level: Grade A)
17. Clinicians should inform patients of the absence of evidence linking testosterone therapy to the development of prostate cancer. (Strong Recommendation; Evidence Level: Grade B)
18. Patients with testosterone deficiency and a history of prostate cancer should be informed that there is inadequate evidence to quantify the risk-benefit ratio of testosterone therapy. (Expert Opinion)
19. Patients should be informed that there is no definitive evidence linking testosterone therapy to a higher incidence of venothrombolic events. (Moderate Recommendation; Evidence Level: Grade C)
20. Prior to initiating treatment, clinicians should counsel patients that, at this time, it cannot be stated definitively whether testosterone therapy increases or decreases the risk of cardiovascular events (e.g., myocardial infarction, stroke, cardiovascular-related death, all-cause mortality). (Moderate Recommendation; Evidence Level: Grade B)
21. All men with testosterone deficiency should be counseled regarding lifestyle modifications as a treatment strategy. (Conditional Recommendation; Evidence Level: Grade B)
Treatment of Testosterone Deficiency
22. Clinicians should adjust testosterone therapy dosing to achieve a total testosterone level in the middle tertile of the normal reference range. (Conditional Recommendation; Evidence Level: Grade C)
23. Exogenous testosterone therapy should not be prescribed to men who are currently trying to conceive. (Strong Recommendation; Evidence Level: Grade A)
24. Testosterone therapy should not be commenced for a period of three to six months in patients with a history of a cardiovascular events. (Expert Opinion)
25. Clinicians should not prescribe alkylated oral testosterone. (Moderate Recommendation; Evidence Level: Grade B)
26. Clinicians should discuss the risk of transference with patients using testosterone gels/creams. (Strong Recommendation; Evidence Level: Grade A)
27. Clinicians may use aromatase inhibitors, human chorionic gonadotropin, selective estrogen receptor modulators, or a combination thereof in men with testosterone deficiency desiring to maintain fertility. (Conditional Recommendation; Evidence Level: Grade C)
28. Commercially manufactured testosterone products should be prescribed rather than compounded testosterone, when possible. (Conditional Recommendation; Evidence Level: Grade C)
Follow-up of Men on Testosterone Therapy
29. Clinicians should measure an initial follow-up total testosterone level after an appropriate interval to ensure that target testosterone levels have been achieved. (Expert Opinion)
30. Testosterone levels should be measured every 6-12 months while on testosterone therapy. (Expert Opinion)
31. Clinicians should discuss the cessation of testosterone therapy three to six months after commencement of treatment in patients who experience normalization of total testosterone levels but fail to achieve symptom or sign improvement. (Clinical Principle)
Purpose
Testosterone testing and prescriptions have nearly tripled in recent years; however, it is clear from clinical practice that there are many men using testosterone without a clear indication.1-3 Some studies estimate that up to 25% of men who receive testosterone therapy do not have their testosterone tested prior to initiation of treatment, and nearly half do not have their testosterone levels checked after therapy commences.2, 3 While up to a third of men who are placed on testosterone therapy do not meet the criteria to be diagnosed as testosterone deficient,2, 3 there are a large percentage of men in need of testosterone therapy who fail to receive it due to clinician concerns, mainly surrounding prostate cancer development and cardiovascular events, although current evidence fails to definitively support these concerns.
The explosion in the use of testosterone in the past decade is multifactorial in its etiology, including the increased use of direct-to-consumer advertising, which has resulted in greater patient knowledge and demand; relaxation of the indications for testosterone prescribing by clinicians; and the establishment of clinical care centers devoted to men's health, testosterone treatment, and anti-aging strategies.
Given the growing concern and need for proper testosterone therapy, the AUA identified a need to produce an evidence-based document that informs clinicians on the proper evaluation and management of testosterone deficient patients. The goals of this document are to (i) guide clinicians in how to assess patients for testosterone deficiency and manage them with testosterone products, and (ii) educate clinicians in key areas of testosterone in which many clinicians are deficient (e.g., interpreting the testosterone literature, understanding testosterone laboratory testing). Ultimately, the AUA and the Testosterone Panel were committed to creating a Guideline that ensures that men in need of testosterone therapy are treated effectively and safely.
Definitions and Index Patient
The Panel chose to cease use of the term hypogonadism, a term introduced decades ago to signify low testosterone levels associated with infertility. Hypogonadism has more recently been used interchangeably with the idea of low testosterone production alone. To be scientifically accurate, the Panel chose the term testosterone deficiency. Testosterone deficiency does not imply simply a state of low testosterone production, but rather to be testosterone deficient is to have low testosterone levels combined with symptoms or signs that are associated with low serum total testosterone (henceforth referred to as 'low testosterone'). Thus, a patient is considered testosterone deficient and a candidate for testosterone therapy only when he meets both criteria. The challenge for clinicians is that the symptoms that have been associated with low testosterone levels are very non-specific and can be manifestations of other conditions (e.g., chronic fatigue, chronic stress, a depressed state).
It was decided that a cut-off value was critical to define testosterone deficiency and that this cut-off be based on at least two total testosterone levels drawn in an early morning fashion at the same laboratory using the same assay. The cut-off of 300 ng/dL was chosen based on the mean total testosterone levels cited in the best available literature with a view to maximizing the potential benefit from prescribing testosterone while minimizing the risks of such treatment.
The Panel explicitly uses the term testosterone therapy rather than testosterone replacement therapy or testosterone supplementation to be in keeping with the beliefs of the current thought leaders in the field. Testosterone therapy refers to all forms of treatment that are aimed at increasing serum testosterone, including exogenous testosterone as well as alternative strategies, such as selective estrogen receptor modulators (SERMs), human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG) or aromatase inhibitors (AIs).
The Panel defines success as achievement of therapeutic testosterone levels to the normal physiologic range of 450 -600 ng/dL (middle tertile of the reference range for most labs) accompanied by symptom/sign improvement/resolution.
The index patient for this guideline is the adult male with testosterone deficiency as defined above; however, the Panel included recommendations for three other patient types who are of great interest and concern for the practicing urologist: the patient with cardiovascular disease (CVD) or who has risk factors for CVD; men with testosterone deficiency who are interested in preserving their fertility; and men with testosterone deficiency who are at risk for or have prostate cancer.
Methodology
The guideline panel developed a priori 15 key questions from which guideline statements were derived. The questions were developed based clinical challenges faced by urologists in daily practice. A systematic review of the published literature was conducted to answer these key questions and provide the evidence base for the guideline. The searches included Ovid Medline In-Process & Other Non-Indexed Citations, Ovid MEDLINE, Ovid EMBASE, Ovid Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials, Ovid Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews, and Scopus. Controlled vocabulary supplemented with keywords was used to search for studies according to each defined question. This search included articles published between January 1, 1980 - February 6, 2017.
The search yielded 15,217 references, 546 (enrolling approximately 350,000 men) of which were used to support guideline statements. Of the outcomes included in the protocol of this systematic review, data were available on quality of life (QoL), sexual function, cardiovascular events, anemia, bone health, insulin resistance, cardiovascular risk factors, mood, cognitive function, body composition, and numerous adverse events. Minimal data were found regarding outcomes of frailty, risk of venous thromboembolism, hyperestrogenemia, sleep apnea, prostate biopsy, recurrence of treated prostate cancer, and incidence of breast cancer. Randomized controlled trials (RCTs) were sought for effectiveness questions, whereas both randomized and non-randomized studies were sought for adverse events and questions of association and risk factors. Random effects meta-analyses were performed when deemed appropriate. Evidence tables (for included studies) and evidence profiles (showing estimates of effect for the outcomes of interest) were generated and presented to the Panel.
Included Interventions. Direct testosterone therapies included the following: oral agents, transdermal agents (gels, creams, patches), buccal agents, trans-nasal agents, intramuscular (IM) agents (short- and long-acting), and subcutaneous (SQ) pellets. Alternative testosterone therapies included SERMs, hCG, and AIs.
Determination of Evidence Strength. The categorization of evidence strength is conceptually distinct from the quality of individual studies. Evidence strength refers to the body of evidence available for a particular question and includes not only individual study quality but consideration of study design, consistency of findings across studies, adequacy of sample sizes, and generalizability of samples, settings, and treatments for the purposes of the guideline. The AUA categorizes body of evidence strength as Grade A (well-conducted and highly-generalizable RCTs or exceptionally strong observational studies with consistent findings), Grade B (RCTs with some weaknesses of procedure or generalizability or moderately strong observational studies with consistent findings), or Grade C (RCTs with serious deficiencies of procedure or generalizability or extremely small sample sizes or observational studies that are inconsistent, have small sample sizes, or have other problems that potentially confound interpretation of data). By definition, Grade A evidence is evidence about which the Panel has a high level of certainty, Grade B evidence is evidence about which the Panel has a moderate level of certainty, and Grade C evidence is evidence about which the Panel has a low level of certainty.
AUA Nomenclature: Linking Statement Type to Evidence Strength. The AUA nomenclature system explicitly links statement type to body of evidence strength, level of certainty, magnitude of benefit or risk/burdens, and the Panel's judgment regarding the balance between benefits and risks/burdens (Table 1 - See button below). Strong Recommendations are directive statements that an action should (benefits outweigh risks/burdens) or should not (risks/burdens outweigh benefits) be undertaken because net benefit or net harm is substantial. Moderate Recommendations are directive statements that an action should (benefits outweigh risks/burdens) or should not (risks/burdens outweigh benefits) be undertaken because net benefit or net harm is moderate. Conditional Recommendations are non-directive statements used when the evidence indicates that there is no apparent net benefit or harm or when the balance between benefits and risks/burdens is unclear. All three statement types may be supported by any body of evidence strength grade. Body of evidence strength Grade A in support of a Strong or Moderate Recommendation indicates that the statement can be applied to most patients in most circumstances and that future research is unlikely to change confidence. Body of evidence strength Grade B in support of a Strong or Moderate Recommendation indicates that the statement can be applied to most patients in most circumstances but that better evidence could change confidence. Body of evidence strength Grade C in support of a Strong or Moderate Recommendation indicates that the statement can be applied to most patients in most circumstances but that better evidence is likely to change confidence. Body of evidence strength Grade C is only rarely used in support of a Strong Recommendation. Conditional Recommendations also can be supported by any evidence strength. When body of evidence strength is Grade A, the statement indicates that benefits and risks/burdens appear balanced, the best action depends on patient circumstances, and future research is unlikely to change confidence. When body of evidence strength Grade B is used, benefits and risks/burdens appear balanced, the best action also depends on individual patient circumstances, and better evidence could change confidence. When body of evidence strength Grade C is used, there is uncertainty regarding the balance between benefits and risks/burdens, alternative strategies may be equally reasonable, and better evidence is likely to change confidence.
Where gaps in the evidence existed, the Panel provides guidance in the form of Clinical Principles or Expert Opinion with consensus achieved using a modified Delphi technique if differences of opinion emerged. A Clinical Principle is a statement about a component of clinical care that is widely agreed upon by urologists or other clinicians for which there may or may not be evidence in the medical literature. Expert Opinion refers to a statement, achieved by consensus of the Panel, that is based on members' clinical training, experience, knowledge, and judgment for which there is no evidence.
For additional information on the challenges associated with reviewing the literature on testosterone deficiency, refer to the Appendix A section in the left menu.
Name Brand Pharmaceutical Agents
The AUA has a policy that all pharmaceutical and biological agents are referred to only by their chemical compound formulation in guidelines, white papers, and best practice statements and not by their brand or generic name. This allows the AUA to eliminate any notion of allegiance to industry in general, or to any product in particular. Additionally, identifying drugs solely by their chemical compound formulation allows guidelines to remain current, despite the dynamic nature of the marketplace.
The AUA has made an exception for this guideline. For most pharmaceutical products, the usage, dosage, and application is consistent across brands, and identification by chemical compound is sufficient to communicate to the reader when to use a given medication. The testosterone therapeutic space is relatively unique. While all products contain the same medication (testosterone), each product and modality has distinct pharmacokinetic and application attributes based on the excipient agents and the permeator components.
For example, there are several testosterone gels available in 1%, 1.62%, and 2% formulations, each marketed under a different brand or generic name. Within this modality family alone, there are three different application sites, including upper body, thigh, and axilla, with four different dosing ranges for each gel.
Identifying injectable drugs can be likewise confusing. While there are three injectable drugs, two of them are short-acting and one is long-acting. Finally, testosterone pellets are also available in branded form, with no generic agents currently available.
To merely refer to injectable or gel testosterone formulations without differentiation does not impart complete and accurate information to the reader. Considering the inherent confusion surrounding testosterone therapy in the current prescribing landscape, the AUA believes it is imperative to be as explicit as possible and present the reader the most complete information, which will optimize the efficacy and safety of testosterone therapy.
Please refer to Table 2 (See button below) for more information on pharmaceutical products discussed in this guideline. A detailed profile of the therapeutic agents discussed in this guideline can be found in Appendix B (in the Appendix B section in the left menu).
Table 2: Dosing Profiles of Testosterone Formulations
Prevalence
The prevalence of testosterone deficiency in the American male population is difficult to quantify. A review by Millar et al.4 searched MEDLINE and Embase databases from January 1966 to July 2014 for studies that compared clinical indication of low testosterone along with a measurement of serum testosterone in men. Among the 40 studies (N=37,565; age 43-82 years) that met the inclusion criteria, the prevalence of low testosterone, defined as the lower normal limit of the assay used, ranged from 2-77%.4 The authors commented on the discrepant testosterone thresholds used to define low testosterone as well as conflicting approaches to measuring testosterone: total testosterone was used in 29 studies, range 200-433 ng/dL; bioavailable testosterone was used in 9 studies, range 69.4-198.4 ng/dL; and free testosterone was used in 4 studies, range 4.6-7.0 ng/dL.
Other population-based studies have attempted to measure prevalence, but have not used standard methodology, which makes arriving at a definitive number of testosterone deficiency difficult. Across the prevalence literature, the cut-off values used to define low testosterone vary widely, heterogeneity exists in the populations studied, the forms of testosterone used to measure testosterone (total and/or free) are not consistent, and the assays utilized to measure testosterone differ. Given these inconsistences, prevalence of low testosterone has varied dramatically among studies, with statistics reporting 2 - 50%.5-8 A summary of findings from four large-scale contemporary prevalence studies can be found in Table 3 (See button below).
Table 3: Prevalence of Testosterone Deficiency
Testosterone Measurement
Testosterone is the predominant androgen in males and is involved in a multitude of physiological and biochemical processes throughout the body. It is bound to albumin (50%, loosely-bound), sex hormone-binding globulin ([SHBG], 44%, tightly-bound), corticotropin-binding globulin (4%, loosely-bound), and approximately 2% circulates as free testosterone.9 The free and loosely-bound testosterone fractions combined are known as bioavailable testosterone.
Testosterone assays are plagued by variability in results. This variability is expressed as a coefficient of variation (CV), which is a measure of precision.10 In order to express this precision of assay test results, two measures of the CV are typically reported: the inter-assay CV and the intra-assay CV. Inter-assay CV measures the agreement between tests using the same method of measurement on identical samples, in the same laboratory, by the same operator using the same equipment within a short interval of time. Intra-assay CV is the degree of variation between repeated measurements of the same sample under different conditions. These parameters are calculated by analyzing normal and abnormal control specimens that have known values of the substance being measured.
The differences in testosterone methodologies have led to considerable effort by a variety of parties including the Centers for Disease Control (CDC) and the College of American Pathologists towards harmonization of assays. Part of this effort includes the availability of serum-based reference material from pooled sera available from the National Institute for Standards and Technology for testosterone and a hormone standardization program using liquid chromatography/mass spectrometry (LCMS) offered by CDC. Laboratories that perform testosterone assays that have a CV that falls within ±6.4 % of samples tested by the CDC (with testosterone values ranging from 2.5-1,000 ng/dL) are certified. The names of these laboratories are available on the CDC website.11-14
An overview of the assays available to aid in the diagnosis of testosterone deficiency is available in Table 4 (See button below).
Table 4: Assays for the Diagnosis of Testosterone Deficiency
Reference Ranges
Well-established reference ranges constitute the essential basis for identifying whether the circulating levels of a particular analyte, testosterone in this case, are normal or low. Due to the challenges in testosterone methodology, there is considerable variability in testosterone reference ranges.13 The specific reference ranges used to diagnose testosterone deficiency are discussed in more depth later in this document. However, practicing clinicians who review testosterone lab results will commonly face the dilemma of whether to use the reference ranges published by their specific lab or the absolute measure itself. As an example, a total testosterone value of 250 ng/dL may be considered low based on the current guideline but be marked within the normal range by the laboratory. This situation commonly occurs as reference laboratories often define a normal value as ranging within the 5th (or 2.5th) and 95th (or 97.5th) percentiles of a sampled population. However, as the testosterone literature uses absolute values to define low testosterone, the absolute value is ultimately the most important factor to determine whether patients may expect to achieve benefits with testosterone therapy. In cases of discrepancy between laboratory reference ranges and this guideline, clinicians are recommended to utilize the absolute value with the understanding that all labs (including CDC-certified LCMS) include some degree of variability. Clinicians wishing to identify laboratories meeting CDC standards are encouraged to refer to the list of sites currently meeting CDC requirements listed on the CDC Hormone Standardization Program.
Diagnosis
Guideline Statement 1
1. Clinicians should use a total testosterone level below 300 ng/dL as a reasonable cut-off in support of the diagnosis of low testosterone. (Moderate Recommendation; Evidence Level: Grade B)
Guideline Statement 2
2. The diagnosis of low testosterone should be made only after two total testosterone measurements are taken on separate occasions with both conducted in an early morning fashion. (Strong Recommendation; Evidence Level: Grade A)
Guideline Statement 3
3. The clinical diagnosis of testosterone deficiency is only made when patients have low total testosterone levels combined with symptoms and/or signs.(Moderate Recommendation; Evidence Level: Grade B)
Guideline Statement 4
4. Clinicians should consider measuring total testosterone in patients with a history of unexplained anemia, bone density loss, diabetes, exposure to chemotherapy, exposure to testicular radiation, HIV/AIDS, chronic narcotic use, male infertility, pituitary dysfunction, and chronic corticosteroid use even in the absence of symptoms or signs associated with testosterone deficiency. (Moderate Recommendation; Evidence Level: Grade B)
Guideline Statement 5
5. The use of validated questionnaires is not currently recommended to either define which patients are candidates for testosterone therapy or monitor symptom response in patients on testosterone therapy. (Conditional Recommendation; Evidence Level: Grade C)
Adjunctive Testing
Guideline Statement 6
6. In patients with low testosterone, clinicians should measure serum luteinizing hormone levels. (Strong Recommendation; Evidence Level: Grade A)
Guideline Statement 7
7. Serum prolactin levels should be measured in patients with low testosterone levels combined with low or low/normal luteinizing hormone levels. (Strong Recommendation; Evidence Level: Grade A)
Guideline Statement 8
8. Patients with persistently high prolactin levels of unknown etiology should undergo evaluation for endocrine disorders. (Strong Recommendation; Evidence Level: Grade A)
Guideline Statement 9
9. Serum estradiol should be measured in testosterone deficient patients who present with breast symptoms or gynecomastia prior to the commencement of testosterone therapy. (Expert Opinion)
Guideline Statement 10
10. Men with testosterone deficiency who are interested in fertility should have a reproductive health evaluation performed prior to treatment. (Moderate Recommendation; Evidence Level: Grade B)
Guideline Statement 11
11. Prior to offering testosterone therapy, clinicians should measure hemoglobin and hematocrit and inform patients regarding the increased risk of polycythemia. (Strong Recommendation; Evidence Level: Grade A)
Guideline Statement 12
12. PSA should be measured in men over 40 years of age prior to commencement of testosterone therapy to exclude a prostate cancer diagnosis. (Clinical Principle)
Counseling Regarding Treatment of Testosterone Deficiency
Guideline Statement 13
13. Clinicians should inform testosterone deficient patients that low testosterone is a risk factor for cardiovascular disease. (Strong Recommendation; Evidence Level: Grade B)
Guideline Statement 14
14. Patients should be informed that testosterone therapy may result in improvements in erectile function, low sex drive, anemia, bone mineral density, lean body mass, and/or depressive symptoms. (Moderate Recommendation; Evidence Level: Grade B)
Guideline Statement 15
15. Patients should be informed that the evidence is inconclusive whether testosterone therapy improves cognitive function, measures of diabetes, energy, fatigue, lipid profiles, and quality of life measures. (Moderate Recommendation; Evidence Level: Grade B)
Guideline Statement 16
16. The long-term impact of exogenous testosterone on spermatogenesis should be discussed with patients who are interested in future fertility. (Strong Recommendation; Evidence Level: Grade A)
Guideline Statement 17
17. Clinicians should inform patients of the absence of evidence linking testosterone therapy to the development of prostate cancer. (Strong Recommendation; Evidence Level: Grade B)
Guideline Statement 18
18. Patients with testosterone deficiency and a history of prostate cancer should be informed that there is inadequate evidence to quantify the risk-benefit ratio of testosterone therapy. (Expert Opinion)
Guideline Statement 19
19. Patients should be informed that there is no definitive evidence linking testosterone therapy to a higher incidence of venothrombolic events. (Moderate Recommendation; Evidence Level: Grade C)
Guideline Statement 20
20. Prior to initiating treatment, clinicians should counsel patients that, at this time, it cannot be stated definitively whether testosterone therapy increases or decreases the risk of cardiovascular events (e.g., myocardial infarction, stroke, cardiovascular-related death, all-cause mortality). (Moderate Recommendation; Evidence Level: Grade B)
Guideline Statement 21
21. All men with testosterone deficiency should be counseled regarding lifestyle modifications as a treatment strategy. (Conditional Recommendation; Evidence Level: Grade B)
Treatment of Testosterone Deficiency
Guideline Statement 22
22. Clinicians should adjust testosterone therapy dosing to achieve a total testosterone level in the middle tertile of the normal reference range. (Conditional Recommendation; Evidence Level: Grade C)
Guideline Statement 23
23. Exogenous testosterone therapy should not be prescribed to men who are currently trying to conceive. (Strong Recommendation; Evidence Level: Grade A)
Guideline Statement 24
24. Testosterone therapy should not be commenced for a period of three to six months in patients with a history of cardiovascular events. (Expert Opinion)
Guideline Statement 25
25. Clinicians should not prescribe alkylated oral testosterone. (Moderate Recommendation; Evidence Level: Grade B)
Guideline Statement 26
26. Clinicians should discuss the risk of transference with patients using testosterone gels/creams. (Strong Recommendation; Evidence Level: Grade A)
Guideline Statement 27
27. Clinicians may use aromatase inhibitors, human chorionic gonadotropin, selective estrogen receptor modulators, or a combination thereof in men with testosterone deficiency desiring to maintain fertility. (Conditional Recommendation; Evidence Level: Grade C)
Guideline Statement 28
28. Commercially manufactured testosterone products should be prescribed rather than compounded testosterone, when possible. (Conditional Recommendation; Evidence Level: Grade C)
Follow-Up of Men on Testosterone Therapy
Guideline Statement 29
29. Clinicians should measure an initial follow-up total testosterone level after an appropriate interval to ensure that target testosterone levels have been achieved. (Expert Opinion)
Guideline Statement 30
30. Testosterone levels should be measured every 6-12 months while on testosterone therapy. (Expert Opinion)
Guideline Statement 31
31. Clinicians should discuss the cessation of testosterone therapy three to six months after commencement of treatment in patients who experience normalization of total testosterone levels but fail to achieve symptom or sign improvement. (Clinical Principle)
References
Tools and Resources
Future Research
There are several areas in the testosterone deficiency space, more specifically, epidemiology, diagnosis, treatment and adverse events, which warrant more detailed investigation.
Epidemiology
- Are there age-specific reference ranges for testosterone? This question should be answered for both total and free testosterone and should likely be focused on two assays, LCMS for total testosterone and equilibrium dialysis for free testosterone.
- What is the impact of changes in testosterone levels over the life-span of an individual patient? Specifically, in a man who has high-normal testosterone levels in his younger years, does a drop in testosterone as he ages (with resultant testosterone levels remaining in the normal range) put him at risk for symptoms and deleterious effects of low testosterone levels?
- Is there a threshold testosterone level that is linked to specific symptoms (e.g., fatigue, low sex drive, ED, depression, reduced physical function, cognitive effects) or signs (e.g., bone density loss, elevation of HbA1C, MACE)?
- Is there a genotype that predicts testosterone deficiency later in life?
- Are there biomarkers for the development of MACE in men with testosterone deficiency?
- Does exposure to chemotherapy put a man at increased risk for development of testosterone deficiency later in life?
Diagnosis of Testosterone Deficiency
- Further research is needed to understand the role of free testosterone level in the diagnosis of men with testosterone deficiency.
- What is the role of androgen receptor sensitivity (CAG repeat analysis) in the diagnosis of testosterone deficiency?
- There is a great need for the development of robust and reliable patient-reported outcome tools (e.g., questionnaires) in the screening and follow-up of response to therapy in men with testosterone deficiency.
Treatment of Testosterone Deficiency
- Long-term analysis is needed on the impact of weight loss and exercise on testosterone levels and reversal of testosterone deficiency.
- There is great need for longer term studies looking at symptom and sign improvement.
- Trials are currently ongoing to develop orally administered exogenous testosterone agents. Approval of such agents would give men further (and likely palatable) therapeutic options.
- Further analysis of the role of subcutaneously administered testosterone. Trials are currently ongoing in this space.
- Greater study is needed on the roles of the different non-traditional testosterone therapies (e.g., SERMs, hCG, AIs).
- Long-term study is needed of the recovery of endogenous testosterone production after short, medium and long-term exogenous testosterone therapy.
- Study of long-term effects of testosterone therapy on MACE is needed.
Adverse Events of Testosterone Deficiency
- Greater study is needed on the prevalence of adverse events (e.g., polycythemia, VTE, gynecomastia, MACE).
- A more detailed analysis is required of the mechanisms of polycythemia development in men on testosterone therapy.
- Further exploration of the impact of long-term testosterone therapy in prostate cancer patients is a great need. In which sub-populations is testosterone therapy safe?
- There is a need for greater study of the bipolar testosterone concept.
- Longer-term studies are needed on spermatogenesis recovery strategies in men who have been on testosterone therapy.
Appendix A: Testosterone Literature Methodology Review
As with all AUA guideline documents, recommendations are based where possible on data extracted from the evidence report, which was generated by methodologists from Mayo Clinic. The development of the evidence report was particularly challenging in the testosterone space due to the heterogeneity in the literature resulting in difficulties comparing data across studies. As the reader delves into this guideline, and more importantly reads the literature, it should be borne in mind that studies have varied significantly in areas, such as patient age, failure to control for concomitant comorbidities associated with low testosterone levels, use of total versus free testosterone, and the testosterone cut-offs used to define low levels. This is further complicated by laboratory methodology issues, such as time of day for the blood draws analyzed, number of levels checked, and assays used.
Thousands of articles on testosterone deficiency and testosterone therapy have been published over the past several decades. To accurately interpret the published testosterone literature, it is important to critically evaluate various aspects of study design, including the population evaluated, study inclusion/exclusion criteria, duration of follow-up, primary endpoints, adverse event reporting, statistical reporting, and clinical relevance of findings.
Study Design. Study design is one of the most important aspects of any investigation because it defines the reliability of outcomes and the extent to which they may be extrapolated to other groups. Meta-analyses of RCTs and cohort studies provide the highest levels of evidence and reliability, followed by individual RCTs, prospective cohorts, retrospective cohorts, and observational studies.
When reviewing results from meta-analyses, it is important to recognize that the overall reliability is dependent on the quality of the weakest study included in the analysis. For example, outcomes of meta-analyses using RCTs alone are generally more robust than those that also include cohort studies. Meta-analyses that are limited to only including RCTs may be restricted to a small number of studies and relevant studies may be excluded that could provide sufficient power to make alternative conclusions. This is particularly relevant for the current guideline as it provides context to situations where the pooled odds ratios and mean differences may contradict or fail to support published meta-analyses.
Study Population. Individual study factors, such as the heterogeneity and demographics of the study population, the comorbidities of the study population and how they are controlled in the analysis, and confidence intervals also impact overall study quality. Study populations in individual trials included in any meta-analysis have a significant impact on the reliability of outcomes. Differences in age, geography, date of initial testing (testosterone immunoassay testing was more commonly used before 2005), comorbid conditions, and baseline and therapeutic testosterone levels across studies introduce heterogeneity in the pooled population. Readers should recognize that guideline statements have been generalized in an attempt to provide a clinically useful document with the understanding that certain populations and clinical scenarios will fall outside of the initial criteria upon which the studies were based. Actual patient scenarios will require individual adaptation with variability in expected outcomes. It also highlights that treating clinicians should have specific endpoints for treatment in mind, with regular monitoring of these outcomes to assure that ongoing therapy is warranted and effective.
Criteria for Testosterone Deficiency and Study Duration. The current guideline only included studies in the meta-analysis that used morning total testosterone <350 ng/dL as an inclusion criterion. Despite this standardization, there remains significant variability among studies. The mean testosterone in the patient population across all the studies was 249 ng/dL but this does not take into account that there were some patients who entered with lower baseline testosterone levels and may have been more likely to demonstrate greater improvements in symptoms compared to those who entered with testosterone levels closer to eugonadal levels, while still meeting the inclusion criteria.411
Study duration is also a significant factor. Testosterone therapy likely yields rapid improvements in some symptoms, while others require a longer time course to show improvement.297 RCTs are commonly of short duration (<1 year), which leads to study results that might have a bias towards lack of benefit in certain symptoms/signs while failing to identify therapeutic benefit, which can require additional time to manifest.
Primary Endpoints, Adverse Events, and Statistical Measures. One important aspect of study design is the specific endpoints and objective measures used to identify outcomes. Studies are often specifically powered and designed to address a key efficacy endpoint, such as a particular symptom improvement, and not to address secondary symptom improvement or adverse events. Although one objective of meta-analyses is to increase study power to identify significant results, this often results in an amalgamation of studies that may have different primary and secondary endpoints, thereby reducing the reliability of the outcomes.
Beyond statistical significance, clinical relevance is another key factor. In analyzing the literature, it is imperative to determine whether or not statistically significant results are clinically meaningful. For example, a particular study might show that testosterone therapy is correlated with a statistically significant improvement in the IIEF scores in a given population; however, the clinician may not feel that this has any clinical meaning for the patient in terms of his QoL or sexual function.
Appendix B: Therapeutic Agents for Treatment of Testosterone Deficiency
Transdermal Agents - Gels and Solutions
Pharmacokinetics and Pharmacodynamics. The unique pharmacokinetic profiles of transdermal testosterone preparations relate to several factors, including the delivery system (alcohols or other penetration enhancers), concentration, surface area applied, and location of application.228, 412 Transdermal drug solubility has been variably estimated, with most studies reporting systemic absorption rates ranging from 13-20%.413-415 Repeated application to the same site (after washing) does not reduce uptake, and the use of an occlusive dressing has been shown to increase absorption by approximately 2.5 fold.415, 416
Topical gels and liquids generally demonstrate less variability in absorption uptake when compared to other therapies.417 After application, steady state levels are achieved within 24-72 hours, with testosterone levels returning to baseline within 4 days of discontinuation.418, 419
Dosing Strategies. Liquids and gels should be applied to clean, dry skin, and the treatment site should not be washed until the time of next application to optimize delivery. If insufficient testosterone levels are achieved with one topical agent, including with dose adjustments, substitution with another topical agent is a viable treatment strategy.420
Efficacy. Topical liquid and gel formulations are able to achieve testosterone levels in the normal range in 74-87% of men and are relatively similar among the various preparations.421-423 Given the variable absorption profiles among patients, dose adjustments may be required to achieve appropriate therapeutic delivery. There is no consistent data at this time that demonstrate that one agent achieves higher serum levels than others.
Adverse Effects. Adverse effects specific to topical preparations include application site reactions (3-16% erythema or rash), and risk of transference. Patients should be particularly cautioned against contact with women and children after application of the gel to limit the possibility of inadvertent transmission. Transference may be mitigated by washing hands, covering the application site with clothing, and washing the region prior to anticipated direct contact with others.
Transdermal Agents - Patches
Pharmacokinetics and Pharmacodynamics. Testosterone patches consist of a mixture of testosterone, penetration agents, and a gelatinous matrix separated from the skin by a microporous membrane. Initial studies of testosterone patches demonstrated increases in total testosterone from a baseline 167 ng/dL to a peak of 1,154 ng/dL at 5.7 hours, with a decrease to 490 ng/dL over the next 12 hours.424 Following removal, the observed testosterone half-life was 116 minutes.425, 426 A multicenter, open label study confirmed mirroring of the circadian rhythm when the patch is applied in the evening with a morning peak of 740 ng/dL and a night-time trough of 213 ng/dL.427
When applied to the abdomen, the patch exhibits slightly lower minimum testosterone values (over 24 hours) compared to other methods of delivery and some gels, with bioequivalence noted for average and maximum testosterone values.428 Two RCTs compared patches to IM testosterone administration and demonstrated improved maintenance of testosterone values within normal physiologic levels and closer representation of the natural circadian rhythm.181, 429 However, it is noteworthy that pharmacokinetic comparisons of any one modality to another are dependent on the dosing and schedule of administration. In the case of topical patches, the testosterone levels achieved directly relate to the amount of surface area exposed to drug.430
Dosing Strategies. Patches are currently available in 2 and 4 mg formulations, with a 4mg starting dose recommended and titration to 6 mg permitted.
Efficacy. Patches are able to achieve testosterone levels within normal physiologic ranges (2 patches every 24-48 hours) in 77-100% of individuals with >85% achieving values >300 ng/dL.181, 429
Adverse Effects. The most common adverse effect with patches is application site reactions, which have been historically reported in up to 60% of patients.181 Other adverse effects include pruritus, application site vesicles, and back pain.431 Compared to topical gels and solutions, the rate of transference is likely minimal.
Buccal Agents
One of the oral alternatives for testosterone therapy is the 30 mg sustained-release muco-adhesive buccal pellet applied to the upper gums above the incisor teeth twice daily.432
Pharmacokinetics. Absorption through the oral mucosa avoids liver deactivation that is experienced by other formulations. Testosterone is released from the tablet in a manner similar to the normal daily rhythm of endogenous testosterone, with serum levels rising rapidly after buccal absorption and peak levels reached by the second 12-hour daily dose. It restores the circulating testosterone level to the physiological range. Removal of the system results in a rapid drop in testosterone levels.433
Dosing. The progressive hydration tablet with a matrix containing 30 mg of testosterone is placed in position on the gum above the right or left canine and is held in position for approximately 30 seconds. It adheres to the buccal surface as it slowly hydrates, becoming soft and gelatinous. It is administered twice daily, 12 hours apart.432
Efficacy. In a 12-week study in 82 men, 72.6% of patients achieved a total testosterone concentration within the physiological range at steady state.434 Men treated with the agent were compared to a group of patients given 5 mg of a testosterone gel formulation, and no differences in mean testosterone serum levels were observed between the two groups.435 The study showed 92% of buccal versus 83% of gel patients achieved testosterone levels in the physiologic range.
Adverse Effects. In clinical trials up to two years long, the most common side effects were gum-related disorders: gum or mouth irritation (9.2%), gum tenderness (3.1%), gum pain (3.1%), and gum edema (2%).432 Another limitation of this therapy includes displacement of the buccal device during exertion activities.
Intranasal Gel
An intranasal testosterone gel applied topically into the nose was approved by the FDA in 2014.
Pharmacokinetics. Following application, testosterone is absorbed through the nasal mucosa to achieve maximum concentrations in about 40 minutes, with a serum half-life of 10-100 minutes.
Dosing. The product is provided in a metered pump that supplies 5.5 mg of testosterone per actuation. The recommended dose is two pumps (one to each nostril) applied three times daily.
Efficacy. In a 90-day open label trial of 306 testosterone deficient men using two actuations (11mg) of the drug applied three times daily, results were reported for 73 men at day 90. Sixty-nine of 73 men (90%) had an average testosterone concentration within the specified normal range for the study (300-1,050 ng/dL). The mean testosterone concentration was 421 ng/dL.436
Adverse Effects. In the clinical trial leading to FDA approval, side effects related to nasal delivery included nasopharyngitis, rhinorrhea, and epistaxis occurring in 7-10% of men.436
Injectable Agents (Short-Acting)
Injectable testosterone is available in several forms, including short acting and long-acting preparations. Although IM injections are the traditional route for injectable agents, the SQ route has also been described with short-acting agents.437
Pharmacokinetics and Pharmacodynamics. The pharmacokinetics of short-acting testosterone therapy depends on the dose, interval, and method of delivery (SQ versus IM). In a study directly comparing the pharmacokinetics of 2 doses of SQ testosterone enanthate injected weekly (50 or 100 mg) and 1 concentration of IM testosterone enanthate injected once (200 mg), the IM testosterone achieved the highest peak testosterone (mean 2,261 ng/dL) followed by SQ 100 mg (1,345 ng/dL) and SQ 50 mg (622 ng/dL).437 The time-to-peak level was slightly faster with IM testosterone (33 hours) compared to SQ 100 mg (36 hours) and SQ 50 mg (45 hours). The half-life for IM testosterone was also shorter at 173 hours versus 240 hours for SQ testosterone. Mean testosterone values over a 7-day time period were 1,659, 896, and 422 ng/dL for IM testosterone SQ 100, and SQ 50, respectively.
Dosing Strategies. The optimal dosing strategy has not been defined for short-acting IM testosterone preparations. In general, smaller dosages at more frequent intervals are preferred over high, less frequent administrations to limit the duration of time spent outside (above or below) the normal reference range. As an example, a starting dose of 100 mg weekly is preferred to 200 mg every 2 weeks or 300-400 mg monthly. The best time to obtain monitoring blood tests for IM testosterone has not been definitively established. Given the half-life of approximately seven days, it is reasonable to obtain testosterone levels four weeks after starting therapy. Historically, testosterone levels have been measured mid-cycle (day three to four); however, such a measurement protocol misses the ability to define peak and trough levels. While mid-cycle testing is convenient for patients, there may be value in assessing peak level (18-36 hours after injection) as the adverse events (e.g., polycythemia, hyperestrogenism) are likely at least partially related to the peak level. Likewise, there might be value in defining the trough level (measured prior to injection on day one) to ensure patients remains therapeutic throughout the entire cycle. Furthermore, the concept of testosterone 'crash' is well recognized by clinicians, with large differences between peak and trough levels potentially leading patients to become symptomatic towards the end of the cycle despite having therapeutic trough testosterone levels.
Efficacy. In contrast to topical agents where a percentage of men have difficulty achieving therapeutic levels within standard dosing ranges, injectable testosterone preparations are able to achieve therapeutic levels in almost any clinical scenario. However, compared to other agents, short-acting injections can result in longer times in the supra-therapeutic and sub-therapeutic ranges, which may impact overall efficacy and rates of adverse events. This may be overcome by altering injection dose and frequency.
Adverse Effects. Adverse effects that are more common with short acting injectable agents include local site reactions (7-33%) and abnormally elevated Hb/Hct (19-44%; mean 1.6 mg/dL in the current meta-analysis of RCTs).181, 182, 191, 194, 195, 201, 203-214, 216-218, 220, 299-301, 310
Injectable Agents (Long-Acting)
Testosterone undecanoate is the only currently available long-acting injection therapy available as a 750 mg (3 mL) preparation and must be administered in the office under supervision.
Pharmacokinetics and Pharmacodynamics. The pharmacokinetic profile of long-acting IM testosterone therapy has been detailed in several studies.438-440 Morgentaler et al. reported outcomes of the currently available preparation (750 mg in 3 mL oil) administered at weeks 0, 4, and every 10 weeks thereafter.438 Peak concentrations were achieved at a mean 7 days after injection (range 4-42 days). Results after the third injection demonstrated median peak and trough T levels of 813 ng/dL and 317 ng/dL, respectively, with overall median values of 476 ng/dL during the 10-week period. These data are notable as they demonstrate far less variability between peak and trough levels compared to shorter-acting preparations.441, 442
No RCTs have compared the current formulation of IM testosterone undecanoate available in the United States to other therapies. One study reported comparative pharmacokinetics between IM testosterone enanthate (250 mg every 3 weeks) and IM testosterone undenaconate (1,000 mg every 9 weeks, a dosage that is only available outside the United States).440 Results demonstrated that IM testosterone enanthate achieved trough levels of 239 ng/dL compared to 470 ng/dL with IM testosterone undecanoate at the end of the 10-week cycle.
Dosing Strategies. The manufacturer-recommended dosing of IM testosterone undecanoate is 750 mg administered at weeks 0, 4, and every 10 weeks thereafter. The dosing at 0 and 4 weeks represents the loading period followed by regular dosing is every 10 weeks. Further individualization may be considered based on trough testosterone levels at the end of a 10-week injection cycle. For trough total testosterone values <300 ng/dL, the interval may be decreased by 1 week (9 weeks) until values >300 ng/dL are achieved at the end of an injection period. For trough total testosterone values >600 ng/dL, the interval may be prolonged by 1 week (11 weeks) until total testosterone levels <600 ng/dL are noted at the end of an injection period.
Efficacy. Administration of 750 mg of IM testosterone undecanoate at weeks 0, 4, and every 10 weeks thereafter maintained total testosterone levels between 300-1,000 ng/dL for 94% of men.438 No men experienced maximal values <300 ng/dL, and only 5% had mean concentrations <300 ng/dL during the 10 weeks. Mean peak levels were 890 ng/dL, with 92% of men remaining below 1,500 ng/dL.
Adverse Effects. The most common adverse effects associated with IM testosterone undecanoate 750 mg administered every 10 weeks include injection site pain, acne, and fatigue (all ≤5%).438, 439 Coughing related to the oil-based preparation has been reported secondary to pulmonary microemboli (POME) and reactions to the benzyl benzoate component.438, 443, 444 Due to these risks, the FDA has issued a boxed warning and requires that providers be risk evaluation and mitigation strategy certified to administer the therapy. Patients should be monitored for 30 minutes in a healthcare setting after injection to monitor for POME or anaphylactic-type symptoms.
Although the absolute risks of POME and anaphylaxis require ongoing study, data from 342 patients undergoing 3,022 injections (1,000 mg in 4 mL) over a period of 3.5 years demonstrated that POME occurred after 1.9% of injections (12% of patients experienced at least one POME), with coughing episodes lasting 1-10 minutes in duration.443 All episodes were managed conservatively in the clinic, with no supplemental oxygen required. No episodes of anaphylaxis occurred. Findings are similar to the previously cited pharmacokinetic study (750 mg in 3 mL) in which one patient in 130 (<1%) experienced coughing lasting 10 minutes.438 It is notable that similar findings have also been observed with other oil-based testosterone preparations that are currently most often self-administered at home (typically with lower volumes of injection).445
Long-acting IM testosterone injection may also result in higher rates of polycythemia when compared to topical therapies, which is consistent with other short-acting IM testosterone therapies. In the current meta-analysis of RCTs, long-acting IM testosterone resulted in a mean increase in Hb levels of 1.4 mg/dL compared to 1.6 mg/dL with short-acting IM testosterone, 0.9 mg/dL with transdermal preparations, and 0.7 mg/dL with topical patches.182, 194, 195, 201, 203-214, 216-218, 299-301, 310
Subcutaneous pellets
SQ testosterone pellets were initially developed and FDA approved in 1972 and were reformulated in the USA in 2008.
Pharmacokinetics and Pharmacodynamics. The unique pharmacokinetic profile of testosterone pellets is due to their crystalline structure, which dissolves slowly in SQ spaces. Individual pellets consist of 75 mg of testosterone and may be combined to deliver variable doses of testosterone therapy.
Initial pharmacokinetic data were provided by Kaminetsky et al.446 who selected the number of pellets inserted based on testosterone levels and BMI: six pellets for baseline total testosterone level <315 ng/dL and BMI <18.5, eight pellets for BMI 18.5-24.9, 10 pellets for BMI 25-30, and 12 pellets for BMI >30. Men with total testosterone level <225 ng/dL received 10 pellets for BMI <25 and 12 pellets for BMI ≥25. Of the 30 patients enrolled, none met criteria for 6 pellets, and a median of 10 pellets were implanted. Peak total testosterone levels were achieved 1 week after implantation (845 ng/dL) and were conserved until at least week 4 (838 ng/dL), with LH suppressed by week 4. The percentage of men with total testosterone values >315 ng/dL declined from 100% at 4 weeks to 86%, 75%, and 14% by 12, 20, and 24 weeks, respectively.
Mean peak total testosterone levels are dose-dependent, with a mean of 746, 866, and 913 ng/dL noted with 8, 10, and 12 pellets administered (not BMI adjusted).446 The duration of effect is similar, however, and is relatively independent of dosing. These findings are supported by a multi-institutional study that reported that with variable dosing and clinical protocols, most men required re-implantation after four months, with all men returning to sub therapeutic levels by six months.447
Based on these initial data, Kaminetsky and colleagues performed a follow-up re-dosing study with 2 fewer pellets administered if peak testosterone levels were >1,000 ng/dL and 2 additional pellets given for testosterone levels <500 ng/dL. With new dosing, mean testosterone levels declined to 275 ng/dL by week 16, with only 32% having levels >315 ng/dL at that time point.
Dosing Strategies. Currently, the FDA recommends placement of two to six pellets every three to six months, which has been the recommendation since the approval of pellets in 1972. These recommendations, however, are not based on current testosterone pellet formulations and contrast with pharmacokinetic data available. Definitive dosing protocols have not been described.446,447, 448
Testosterone levels should be obtained at one to four weeks after insertion.446 These 'peak' levels facilitate adjustment of future pellet number: peak level >1,000 ng/dL, reduce by 2 pellets at next insertion; <500 ng/dL, increase by 2 pellets. Subsequent testosterone levels should be assessed around three months after implantation and re-checked every two to four weeks thereafter if persistently therapeutic levels are found. Although no consensus exists, it is reasonable to perform re-implantation when total testosterone levels are <400 ng/dL. Due to variations within the same individual, it is recommended to obtain end-of-cycle testosterone measurements prior to implantation to ensure that levels are sub-therapeutic.446
Efficacy. Data from a large, multi-institutional series using varied protocols (inserted pellet number ranged from 6 to >10 pellets), demonstrated therapeutic levels in 100% of men at 4 weeks and maintained levels >300 ng/dL at 4 months. It is notable that the majority of providers elected to utilize ≥10 pellets (63%), with 27% of cases including 8-9 pellets, and only 10% of cases using 6-7 pellets. No providers utilized five or fewer pellets, which contrasts with the FDA recommended dosing.221
Adverse Effects. Mild level adverse events specific to SQ pellet insertion includes polycythemia (48-50%), ecchymosis (32-36%), tenderness (20-32%), pain (28-29%), and swelling (16-18%), all of which resolve by 4 months post-insertion.446 Moderate level adverse events were less common (e.g., pain 3%, erythema 3%, ecchymoses 7%) and improved within 1 week. Pellet extrusions are also possible and may be reduced by the use of a V technique whereby 2 channels are created for pellet insertion, thus keeping the most superficial pellet >1cm away from the skin.449 Results of the modified technique resulted in reduced extrusion (7.5% down to 0.8%), infection (5% down to 1.2%), pain (5% down to 1.2%), but an increase in hematoma occurrence (0% up to 1.2%). Of note, hematoma rates were not impacted by the use of anti-coagulants (1.7%), although many practitioners are cautious about pellet use in this population. In one retrospective comparative series, the rate of polycthemia (Hct >52%) with pellets was also higher (13%) than topical gels (5%) but lower than IM testosterone agents (19%) (p=0.03).220
Appendix C: Adjunctive Testing
Appendix D: Testosterone Therapy and the Risk of Major Adverse Cardiac Events
Given the conflicting nature of the evidence, the Panel cannot definitively state that there is an association between testosterone therapy and subsequent MACE events nor can it be stated definitely that testosterone therapy is associated with reduced incidence of MACE. However, the FDA added a warning to testosterone product labeling after reviewing five observational studies and two meta-analyses of RCTs that examined the effects of testosterone therapy on MACE.
Two of the trials and one meta-analysis pointed to an increased risk of cardiovascular events,363, 364, 366 two revealed no cardiovascular risk,233, 367 and one was neutral with respect to risk.373 The Corona meta-analysis,372 which showed that there was no increased risk of cardiovascular events, was not officially reviewed but was taken into consideration in the final analysis. Although the committee reviewing the evidence concluded that there was not enough data to definitively state that testosterone therapy posed a significant cardiovascular risk, the FDA nonetheless required testosterone product manufacturers to add information to the labeling about a possible increased risk of myocardial infarction and cerebrovascular accidents in patients using testosterone therapy.
Two of the retrospective studies included in the FDA review pointed to an increased risk of cardiovascular events in men on testosterone therapy. Vigen et al. (2013)363 conducted a retrospective analysis of patients who received a prescription for testosterone therapy after coronary angiography. The end-points included all-cause mortality as well as cardiovascular events. Patients were excluded if they had previously been on testosterone therapy, had a total testosterone >300 ng/dL, had a baseline Hct >50%, a PSA ≥4 ng/mL, or had commenced testosterone therapy after a myocardial infarction. Over a mean duration of 27.5 months, 1,223 men received testosterone therapy, and 7,486 were placed on placebo. In the testosterone therapy group, the raw data revealed a 2% myocardial infarction rate and a 3% cerebrovascular accident rate compared to 6% and 6%, respectively, in those patients not receiving testosterone. Complex statistical analysis using a methodology known a stabilized inverse propensity treatment weighting was utilized to adjust for 50 potentially confounding variables. Following inverse propensity treatment weighting, the cumulative percentage of patients who met the primary outcome 3 years post-angiography was 25.7% on treatment and 19.9% in the placebo group. This resulted in a calculated OR for developing a cardiovascular event in the testosterone therapy group of 1.29 (CI: 1.04 - 1.58; p=0.02), after adjusting for the presence of CVD. Two errata were published because of significant data errors in the original dataset. It is also unclear if everyone receiving a testosterone prescription actually used the medication, considering that 17.6% of patients in the treatment group filled only a single prescription. There was also inadequate documentation of on-treatment testosterone levels with 40% of men having no documented laboratory testing performed after the prescribing of testosterone therapy.
Finkle et al. (2014)364 conducted a retrospective analysis of the Truven healthcare database (n=55,593) and compared non-fatal myocardial infarction events in men who were on testosterone therapy to those on PDE5 inhibitors. The authors compared the relative risk ratio (RRR) of developing a myocardial infarction within 90 days of receiving a testosterone or PDE5 inhibitor prescription compared to the year prior when patients were not using any medication. For men without a history of CVD, the RRR for having a myocardial infarction in those aged <65 years was 0.91 (CI: 0.60, 1.37) and for men ≥ 65 years of age 2.41 (CI: 1.12, 5.17). For men with a history of CVD, the RRR were more striking: <65 years of age 2.07 (CI: 1.05, 4.11) and ≥65 years 1.91 (CI: 0.66, 5.5). This analysis was limited in that it used an insurance claims database, had an abbreviated follow-up, and compared testosterone therapy to a class of medications (PDE5 inhibitors) known to be endothelial stabilizers and potentially cardioprotectants.
The Xu meta-analysis of 27 randomized placebo-controlled trials pointed to an increase in cardiovascular risk in men using testosterone therapy, although the results were statistically insignificant.366 A total of 2,994 men were randomized to either testosterone (n=1,773) or placebo (n=1,261) for 12 weeks to 3 years. There was a total of 115 cardiac events in men on treatment and 65 in the placebo arm (OR=1.54; CI 1.09, 2.18). Included in these events were 33 deaths, 22 of which were in men who were on testosterone therapy, and 11 in the placebo groups. A stratification of trials according to funding showed that those supported by pharmaceutical companies (n=13) showed decreased odds of having a cardiovascular event in testosterone patients (OR=0.89; CI: 0.50, 1.60), while those not funded by industry showed that the risk of a cardiovascular related event on testosterone therapy was greater (OR=2.06; CI: 1.34, 3.17). Despite the homogenous nature of the trials included, it was noted that there was a risk of publication bias since it is possible that trials favoring testosterone therapy might remain unpublished. Other limitations included the possible subjective nature in reporting some adverse events.
Conversely, the Shores, 367 Muraleedharan,233 and Baillargeon373 studies determined that there was no increased risk of MACE in men who were on testosterone therapy. The Shores study was an observational study of 1,031 men (mean age 62.1 years) with total testosterone level <250 ng/dL (mean 181 ng/dL). Over a mean period of 41 months, 398 were reported to be on testosterone therapy, while 631 were not. Mortality in testosterone treated men was 10.3% (mortality rate of 3.4 deaths/1,000 person-years) compared with 20.7% (5.7 deaths/1,000 person-years) in men who were not on treatment (p<0.0001). After adjustment for confounding factors, testosterone therapy remained associated with a decreased risk of death (HR: 0.61; CI 0.42, 0.88).
The Muraleedharan study looked at men with type 2 diabetes and stratified the population (n=581; mean age 59 years) into those who had normal testosterone levels (>300 ng/dL, n=343) and low testosterone levels (<300 ng/dL, n=238). Of the men with low testosterone, 64 received treatment via gel or IM injections for 42 months and were followed for nearly 6 years. At the 6-month time point, there were 34 deaths from CVD (17 in each group) and an overall death rate of 17.2% and 9% in the in the low and normal testosterone groups, respectively. When comparing the likelihood of survival, there was a significant decrease in survival in the low testosterone group compared to those with normal testosterone (adjusted HR=2.02; CI: 1.2, 3.4; p<0.01). Furthermore, a comparison of patients on treatment compared to those who were not showed that the HR for decreased survival was 2.3 (CI: 1.3, 3.9; p<0.01). The increases in mortality were found to be independent of age, BMI, pre-existing CVD, current smoking status, and statin therapy. The authors conceded that those patients treated had more severe testosterone deficiency, which may have resulted in treatment bias.
Finally, the Baillargeon study showed that testosterone therapy was not associated with an increased risk of myocardial infarction (HR=0.84; CI: 0.69 -1.02). The authors conducted a retrospective analysis of 6,355 Medicare beneficiaries who had at least 1 testosterone injection (mean number of injections over the entire study period 8.2) and matched them to 19,065 men who were testosterone therapy naïve for the preceding 12 months. Although confounders were accounted for in the analysis, concurrent medications that may have reduced the risk for myocardial infarction or other testosterone therapies used outside of the study protocol were not controlled for or assessed.
Since the FDA warning in 2015, other studies have failed to demonstrate a risk of cardiovascular events in patients on testosterone therapy. The T-Trials (2017)229 randomized 790 men (mean age 72 years) to either testosterone gel (n=395) or placebo (n=395) for 1 year to measure the effect of testosterone on physical and sexual function and patient vitality. Over half of the men were obese (BMI >30), and 70% had documented hypertension at baseline. At the end of the year-long treatment period, two men from the treatment arm had a definite myocardial infarction, and none were recorded in the placebo arm. During the subsequent year of follow-up, eight men from the placebo group and one man who had been on treatment were adjudicated to have had a definite myocardial infarction. Although the study was not powered to detect cardiovascular events as a primary endpoint, the authors did not detect increased risk in the testosterone group.
Abbreviations
Disclaimer
This document was written by the Evaluation and Management of Testosterone Deficiency Guideline Panel of the American Urological Association Education and Research, Inc., which was created in 2016. The Practice Guidelines Committee (PGC) of the AUA selected the committee chair. Panel members were selected by the chair. Membership of the Panel included specialists in urology, cardiology, family medicine, and psychology with specific expertise on this disorder. The mission of the Panel was to develop recommendations that are analysis-based or consensus-based, depending on Panel processes and available data, for optimal clinical practices in the treatment of muscle-invasive bladder cancer. Funding of the Panel was provided by the AUA. Panel members received no remuneration for their work. Each member of the Panel provides an ongoing conflict of interest disclosure to the AUA. While these guidelines do not necessarily establish the standard of care, AUA seeks to recommend and to encourage compliance by practitioners with current best practices related to the condition being treated. As medical knowledge expands and technology advances, the guidelines will change. Today these evidence-based guidelines statements represent not absolute mandates but provisional proposals for treatment under the specific conditions described in each document. For all these reasons, the guidelines do not pre-empt physician judgment in individual cases. Treating physicians must take into account variations in resources, and patient tolerances, needs, and preferences. Conformance with any clinical guideline does not guarantee a successful outcome. The guideline text may include information or recommendations about certain drug uses ('off label') that are not approved by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA), or about medications or substances not subject to the FDA approval process. AUA urges strict compliance with all government regulations and protocols for prescription and use of these substances. The physician is encouraged to carefully follow all available prescribing information about indications, contraindications, precautions and warnings. These guidelines and best practice statements are not in-tended to provide legal advice about use and misuse of these substances. Although guidelines are intended to encourage best practices and potentially encompass available technologies with sufficient data as of close of the literature review, they are necessarily time-limited. Guidelines cannot include evaluation of all data on emerging technologies or management, including those that are FDA-approved, which may immediately come to represent accepted clinical practices. For this reason, the AUA does not regard technologies or management which are too new to be addressed by this guideline as necessarily experimental or investigational.Testosterone Deficiency Syndrome
Make Appointments & Get Care
What is Testosterone Deficiency Syndrome?
Testosterone Deficiency Syndrome, or male hypogonadism, occurs when the body does not produce enough testosterone, the main male hormone. Testosterone plays a key role in an individual's sex drive, muscle mass, and mental and physical energy.
This condition generally affects older individuals, but younger patients can also be affected.
While the term “andropause” is sometimes used for this condition, it is inaccurate. Unlike menopause, testosterone deficiency syndrome is not an inevitable result of aging.
Symptoms
- Reduced libido
- Difficulty obtaining or keeping an erection
- Difficulty concentrating or making decisions
- Poor results from exercise programs
- Increase in body fat
- Loss of lean body (muscle) mass
- Loss of bone density
- Depression
- Poor work performance
- Unfavorable changes in cholesterol profile
Testosterone deficiency syndrome can contribute to the start or worsening of various diseases. This can include:
- Increased risk of cardiovascular disease
- Increased risk of death from a cardiovascular event
- Increased risk of metabolic syndrome: high blood pressure, elevated insulin levels, excess belly fat and abnormal cholesterol levels
- Strong association with diabetes
- Strong association with atherosclerotic disease of the aorta
- Higher incidence of prostate cancer
- Association with more aggressive variants of cancer
Schedule an appointment with a UR Medicine provider.
Call (585) 275-2838UR Medicine's Treatments for Testosterone Deficiency Syndrome
Testosterone deficiency is typically diagnosed with a simple blood test.
When a specific cause for testosterone deficiency is identified, treatment can be focused on that cause. In the case of excess pituitary secretion of hormones, for example, medicine or surgery may be used to correct the underlying problem.
When no specific cause can be identified, testosterone replacement therapy is the most common treatment. Testosterone replacement therapy raises the body’s testosterone levels through regular administration of testosterone. Various methods can be used: patches, gels, Intramuscular testosterone supplementation (delivered through periodic injections), or “pellets” implanted beneath the skin.
What Sets Us Apart?
UR Medicine Urology provides the Rochester metropolitan area and surrounding region's most advanced and complete urologic care. We have the most highly trained specialists. Many of our doctors are fellowship trained, the highest level of education available.
We use the most advanced technology to perform procedures such as minimally invasive robotic surgery. We also use the latest da Vinci Surgical System, with high-definition 3D imaging to enhance the surgeon's vision during procedures.
As part of an academic medical center, we’re involved in the very latest research to develop more effective treatments.
Locations
View All LocationsWe serve you in the Rochester metropolitan area and surrounding region.
View All Locations13 locations
158 Sawgrass Drive, 2nd Floor, Suite 230
Rochester, NY 14620
Strong West
156 West Avenue, 1st Floor or 3rd Floor
Brockport, NY 14420
699 South Main Street, Suite 6
Canandaigua, NY 14424
Noyes Memorial Hospital
111 Clara Barton Street
Dansville, NY 14437
Noyes Health Services
48 East South Street
Geneseo, NY 14454
South Pointe Landing
10 South Pointe Landing, Suite 130
Rochester, NY 14606
Jones Memorial Hospital
191 North Main Street, 3rd Floor
Wellsville, NY 14895
St. James Medical Office Building
7309 Seneca Point Road North, Suite 102
Hornell, NY 14843
Lattimore Medical Center
125 Lattimore Road, Ground Floor, Suite G-100
Rochester, NY 14620
Highland Hospital
1000 South Avenue
Rochester, NY 14620
Ambulatory Care Center at Strong Memorial Hospital
601 Elmwood Avenue, 2nd Floor
Rochester, NY 14642Scientists have mapped out how the body transports testosterone, and their surprising findings may explain low testosterone levels seen in men with diabetes or patients on certain medications.
The discovery lets scientists understand exactly how testosterone, the male sex hormone, binds to a protein called serum albumin and can be carried through the body.
The finding suggests that many drugs bind to serum albumin in the same way as testosterone, potentially explaining why the drugs interfere with normal testosterone transport. Further, the researchers report a similar overlap may explain why low testosterone is common in men with type 2 diabetes.
“This represents a key finding from one of many albumin-related projects investigated in our laboratory. We study human and equine serum albumins but are interested in bovine, rat, mouse and rabbit serum albumins as well. These projects have been active for more than a decade in the lab,” said principal investigator Wladek Minor, PhD, of the School of Medicine. “But we cannot stop our research here. We must address the next big challenge, which is the determination of albumin structures in complex with commonly used and abused opioids. We believe that the determination of these structures may be crucial in the development of new methods and treatments as our country combats the opioid crisis.”
Potential Answers About Low T
The discovery represents a collaboration of Minor’s lab, in UVA’s Department of Molecular Physiology and Biological Physics, with that of David Hage, PhD, of the Department of Chemistry at the University of Nebraska–Lincoln. Together, they developed the first 3D structure of serum albumin bound to a sex hormone with results of binding studies, which led to some unexpected findings.
Using an approach known as X-ray crystallography, the researchers were able to inspect the complex in unbelievable detail. But this was no easy task: First they had to capture the pairing inside a lab-made crystal – a tremendous challenge – and then they could bombard it with a stream of powerful X-rays. By tracking how the X-rays diffracted, they could determine the shape of something far too small for even the most powerful light microscopes to see.
What they found defied expectations: Testosterone was not bound in its previously predicted binding site but rather in two other sites, both with an affinity for fatty acids, various metabolites and certain drugs. That suggests that testosterone faces strong competition for transport inside the body – important information for doctors not just when prescribing existing treatments but also when looking for new treatments. (Serum albumin, for example, is an important carrier of cancer drugs.)
“It is wonderful that we can use state-of-the-art techniques to study the transport of hormones and drugs in the blood on the molecular level.” said Mateusz P. Czub, a graduate student in the Minor Lab and lead author of the group’s new paper outlining the discovery. “I hope to combine our results with the findings of other researchers from UVA so that we may collectively contribute to the development of personalized medical treatments.”
“I am thrilled to have contributed to a basic research project that can be later used for translational research and advancing the treatment of real patients in a clinic,” said Barat S. Venkataramany, the second author and an undergraduate student in UVA’s Department of Chemistry, who was recently admitted to medical school. The Minor lab, like many successful UVA labs, routinely involves undergraduates in its research, which benefits both the students and the research.
Testosterone Findings Published
The researchers have unveiled their findings in the scientific journal Chemical Science. The article was featured as the journal’s outside back cover story for the Feb. 14 issue. The research team consisted of Czub, Venkataramany, Karolina A. Majorek, Katarzyna B. Handing, Przemyslaw J. Porebski, Sandya R. Beeram, Kyungah Suh, Ashley G. Woolfork, Hage, Ivan G. Shabalin and Minor.
The work was supported by the National Institutes of Health’s National Institute of General Medical Sciences, grants R01-GM117325, R01-GM117080, and R01-GM118619 as well as funds from the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health and the Department of Health and Human Services under contracts Nos. HHSN272201200026C and HHSN272201700060C.
To keep up with the latest medical research news from UVA, subscribe to the Making of Medicine blog.
MORE: Scientific paper by Wladek Minor among the most cited of all time.Testosterone for men
Stable levels of testosterone are vital in men as testosterone is more than just a sex hormone. Testosterone levels may affect a variety of functions from mood and cognitive ability to cardiovascular health, muscle mass and body fat. Testosterone deficiency can leave you feeling like a shadow of your former self. With low testosterone you may experience the following:
- Low libido
- Lethargy
- Depression
- Erectile dysfunction
- Anxiety
- Inability to gain muscle mass
Testosterone Replacement Therapy (TRT) in a safe option for men who lack testosterone or are unable to produce normal levels the body requires.
In short, your life becomes miserable. Testosterone is the lifeblood of every man and the balance or imbalance of this hormone can have dramatic effects on your quality of life.
Before undergoing TRT, your symptoms will need to be evaluated in a full consultation to determine what treatments and schedule is right for you, so you can tackle the ‘male menopause.’
You can get further information on the therapies available like hormone replacement therapy and detail about the risks and benefits of each at the link below. For any further questions, don’t hesitate to get in touch with us using the form at the bottom.
How TRT works in men
Taking over the management of your hormones with male testosterone therapies can help transform lives when done right.
Your sex hormones (testosterone and oestrogen) along with your gonadotrophins (LH and FSH) operate naturally in a tightly regulated and automated process. The brain creates a feed back loop which regulates how much testosterone is released. There is an interplay between the signal from the hypothalamus, the pituitary gland, and your testes.
When you start Testosterone Replacement Therapy the regulated process will still occur but to a lesser degree and you will then take over control. You and your doctor determine how much testosterone your body receives, when it receives it and how often it receives it. Normally this is all managed for you by the Hypothalamus, but because age related Andropause or adult hypogonadism has blunted the response and has lowered your normal output to an unsatisfactory level it is now up to you to manage your hormones by topping them up with balanced testosterone replacement therapy including HCG.
How your body regulates testosterone
An analogy might be to think of your heating system. The thermostat would be the hypothalmus and pituitary gland and Boiler would be your testes. The thermostat releases a signal called gonadotrophin releasing hormones, which signals your pituitary gland (think of microprocessor in your thermostat) to release gonadotrophins (LH and FSH) which signal to the testes (boiler) to produce more testosterone and sperm for reproduction. This process keeps the testes functioning and healthy. The testes produce sperm and testosterone allowing them to maintain their size. The Leydig cells are responsible for the production of testosterone and are sensitive to the signal (LH) sent from your pituitary. Without this signal which can be blunted by taking testosterone then the Leydig cells will cease functioning causing testicular atrophy. This can be prevented using HCG or recombinant LH and FSH as an adjunct whilst on male testosterone replacement therapy.
Age related testosterone deficiency can be described by several different terms:
- Andropause
- ManOpause
- Adult onset hypogonadism
- Male menopause
- Low T
Other Names for low male testosterone or traditional/classical hypogonadism
- Primary hypogonadism
- Secondary hypogonadism
- Idiopathic hypogonadism
Diagnosis for low testosterone
Our testosterone balancing treatments
Our doctors will order a blood test to try to determine the category of low testosterone you are suffering and come up with a bespoke treatment plan.
HCG + Testosterone + Oestrogen Control= Balanced TRT, which we believe is the gold standard for Testosterone Replacement Therapy.
There have never been more options available for treating low testosterone. The goal of therapy should be to keep your body producing natural endogenous testosterone whilst topping up what you may be missing. By correctly balancing your testosterone and other hormones you will mitigate the symptoms associated with low testosterone levels.
After your doctor diagnoses you for low testosterone you can set out finding the right treatment. You can get diagnosed by contacting us and booking for a blood test.
Common Treatments for Testosterone in the UK
Injectable Testosterone Preparations
- Sustanon®(Aspen), testosterone propionate 30 mg, testosterone phenylpropionate 60 mg, testosterone isocaproate 60 mg
- Nebido®(Bayer), testosterone undecanoate 250 mg/mL in a 4ml amp or vial dosed 1gm ever 10-14 weeks by slow intramuscular injection
- Testosterone Enantate (Non-proprietary) , testosterone enantate 250 mg/mL dosed 250mg every 10-14 days
- Virormone®(Nordic), testosterone propionate 50 mg/mL, 2-mL amp Short Acting Testosterone ester dosed 2-3 times weekly
Topical Testosterone
- Alcohol Gels commercially prepared
- TESTIM®(Ferring),Gel, testosterone 50 mg/5 g tube, 30-tube pack
- TESTOGEL®(Besin),Gel, testosterone 50 mg/5 g sachet, 30-sachet packs
- TOSTRAN®(ProStrakan),Gel, testosterone 2% (10 mg/metered application), 60-g multidose dispenser
- Lipoderm based Testosterone creams for scrotal applications. These are non commercially available creams that can be applied to the scrotum.
- Oral Androgens for reducing SHGB. There are times when SHGB bind too much of your total testosterone. These androgens have helped significantly reduce those levels elevate free unbound testosterone.
- HCG-Human Chorionic Gonadotrophin – used to help treat delayed puberty, undescended testes or oligospermia (low sperm count). This treatment can be used as monotherapy or as an adjunct with exogenous testosterone. Your doctor will discuss with you an individual treatment plan.
Our doctors recommended treatment plans are based on data collected for you individually through comprehensive blood testing, the latest international data, and by listening your your symptoms to tailor a plan that will help improve your quality of life.
Our doctors will make every effort to focus on bespoke treatment and individualised care. There is no one size fits all or cookie cutter approach.
Your treatment could include a suitable testosterone ester or combination of esters dosed appropriately so you will need very little oestrogen control if any. HCG is on offer to maintain fertility helping with both the size and function of your testes.
When you start on TRT (testosterone replacement therapy) the body begins to sense the elevation of exogenous testosterone through it’s conversion to oestrogen and then over time begins to slow down the production of any of your endogenous testosterone.You might not mind because the overall output of your endogenous testosterone was low or low normal to begin with. It may or may not completely shut down but it will be greatly diminished depending on how your body senses and responds to it. At the end of the day the benefit of TRT will outweigh the substandard levels and symptoms associated with it. When used in men as a therapeutic, HCG mimics the actions of gonadatrophins LH and to a lesser degree FSH. With HCG the testes are receiving a steady signal to produce more testosterone. Essentially you are bypassing the hypothalmus and the pituitary and providing a signal directly to the testes. This 3 part approach (Exogenous Testosterone, Oestrogen Control, and HCG) maintains function and size of your testes whilst also benefiting from exogenous testosterone.
What about oestrogen blockers or aromatase inhibitors, how do they make a difference?
We know that HCG signals the testes to produce keeping the circulation of testosterone flowing through signalling the testicles to “stay open for business” there will be a glut of testosterone which will most likely be converted by various tissues that contain the aromatase enzyme. To minimise the amount of oestrogen it’s important not to create an imbalance. Putting the right amount of testosterone in the right conditions will provide in most cases the right amount of oestrogen.
In some cases where dose reduction, diet and lifestyle alone doesn’t lower oestrogen, a small tablet called an aromatase inhibitor may be prescribed. This tablet was originally designed for woman undergoing breast cancer treatment to keep the levels of oestrogen in a women’s body very low and thus preventing oestrogen sensitive breast cancer for recurring.
In men aromatase inhibitors also reduce the total amount of oestrogen in the body. The challenge for men is finding the right dose of testosterone so ideally no aromatase inhibitor is needed. If an aromatase inhibitor is needed then only the least amount should be used.
Too much oestrogen, prolactin, insulin resistance, or genetic predisposition may cause increased breast growth in men known as gynaecomastia or man boobs which may require surgical excision.
Many of the side effects associated with male testosterone therapy can also be attributed to oestrogen. You may have too much or too little. Both can be an issue. There are even cases of men who have low testosterone and elevated oestrogen with symptoms. In these men it’s not possible to lower there oestrogen level by lowering the dose of exogenous testosterone. In these cases aromatase inhibitors such as anastrozole in low doses may be needed for a short period of time.
Anastrozole has a half life of around 3 days which means you can can dose less frequently and with smaller doses around 0.25 to 0.5 once per week or every 5 days if this is absolutely needed.
This is key as too much reduction of oestrogen or too little oestrogen will dampen a man’s sex drive, cause the penis to loose sensitivity, and potentially affect mood, affect insulin sensitivity, decrease fat loss, and may cause bone loss if levels are too low for too long. It comes down to creating the right balance.
Supporting Studies in the scientific literature
- An update on male hypogonadism therapy Expert Opin Pharmacother. 2014 Jun; 15(9): 1247–1264. Published online 2014 Apr23.doi: PMCID: PMC4168024. NIHMSID: NIHMS627664 Prasanth Surampudi, MD,1 Ronald S Swerdloff, MD,2 and Christina Wang, MD‡†,3
- Testosterone Therapies. Urol Clin North Am. 2016 May;43(2):185-93. doi: 10.1016/j.ucl.2016.01.004. Epub 2016 Mar 18. Khera M1.
- Low testosterone associated with obesity and the metabolic syndrome contributes to sexual dysfunction and cardiovascular disease risk in men with type 2 diabetes.Wang C, Jackson G, Jones TH, Matsumoto AM, Nehra A, Perelman MA, Swerdloff RS, Traish A, Zitzmann M, Cunningham G.Diabetes Care. 2011 Jul;34(7):1669-75. doi: 10.2337/dc10-2339. Review. No abstract available.
- Changes in testosterone related to body composition in late midlife: Findings from the 1946 British birth cohort study David Bann, Frederick C. W. Wu, Brian Keevil, Hany Lashen, Judith Adams, Rebecca Hardy, Graciela Muniz, Diana Kuh, Yoav Ben‐Shlomo, Ken K. Ong Obesity (Silver Spring) 2015 July; 23(7): 1486–1492. Published online 2015 June 5. doi: 10.1002/oby.21092 PMCID: PMC4744737
- Testosterone and weight loss: the evidence Abdulmaged M. Traish Curr Opin Endocrinol Diabetes Obes. 2014 October; 21(5): 313–322. Published online 2014 August 28. doi: 10.1097/MED.0000000000000086 PMCID:PMC4154787
- Effects of testosterone on spatial learning and memory in adult male rats Mark D. Spritzer, Emily D. Daviau, Meagan K. Coneeny, Shannon M. Engelman, W. Tyler Prince, Karlye N. Rodriguez-Wisdom Horm Behav. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 April 1. Published in final edited form as: Horm Behav. 2011 April; 59(4): 484–496. Published online 2011 February 2. doi: 10.1016/j.yhbeh.2011.01.009 PMCID: PMC3081396
- Protective role of testosterone in ischemia-reperfusion-induced acute kidney injury Andrea Soljancic, Arnaldo Lopez Ruiz, Kiran Chandrashekar, Rodrigo Maranon, Ruisheng Liu, Jane F. Reckelhoff, Luis A. Juncos Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol. 2013 June 1; 304(11): R951–R958. Published online 2013 April 3. doi: 10.1152/ajpregu.00360.2012 PMCID: PMC4074000
- Diagnosis and management of testosterone deficiency James A McBride, Culley C Carson, Robert M Coward Asian J Androl. 2015 Mar-Apr; 17(2): 177–186. Published online 2014 December 5. doi: 10.4103/1008-682X.143317 PMCID: PMC4650468
- Endocrinology of the Aging Male Andre B. Araujo, Gary A. Wittert Best Pract Res Clin Endocrinol Metab. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 April 1.Published in final edited form as: Best Pract Res Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2011 April; 25(2): 303–319. doi: 10.1016/j.beem.2010.11.004 PMCID: PMC3073592What is a testosterone levels test?
A testosterone levels test measures the amount of the hormone testosterone in a sample of your blood. Hormones are chemical messengers in your bloodstream that control the actions of certain cells or organs.
Though often considered a male sex hormone, testosterone is present in females in smaller amounts. In both sexes, testosterone helps control your sex drive and helps with muscle and bone growth. In males, it is also involved in
- Body hair growth.
- A deepening voice during puberty.
- The production of sperm.
- The making of new red blood cells.
- An increase in height.
All the testosterone in your blood is either bound to proteins or unbound (free). Free testosterone is more available for your body to use when building bones and muscles. However, most of your testosterone is bound to proteins such as sex-hormone-binding globulin (SHBG) and albumin. When testosterone is bound, your body can't use it as easily. This is necessary for your health. Having most of your testosterone bound to proteins makes sure your body doesn't use too much.
Your health care provider can measure your testosterone levels by ordering one of three tests. These are:
- A total testosterone test, which measures both bound and free testosterone. This is the most common type of test.
- A free testosterone test, which measures only the unattached form of testosterone. This test is less common, but it may help your provider diagnose certain medical conditions.
- A bioavailable testosterone test, which measures free testosterone and testosterone that's attached to proteins other than SHBG. This test isn't commonly done, but like a free testosterone test, it may help diagnose certain medical conditions.
Other names: serum testosterone, total testosterone, free testosterone, bioavailable testosterone
What is it used for?
A testosterone levels test may be used with other tests to help your provider find the cause of abnormal testosterone levels. It can also be used to monitor your health if you:
- Have had an abnormal testosterone test result in your past.
- Are taking medicine that may affect your testosterone levels.
- Are taking hormone therapy.
In children and teens, your provider may use a testosterone levels test to figure out what's causing early or delayed puberty.
Why do I need a testosterone levels test?
You may need this test if you have symptoms of abnormal testosterone levels.
For males who have gone through puberty, the test is mostly used for symptoms of low T levels (testosterone levels which are too low).
The symptoms of low T may include:
- Low sex drive.
- Erectile disfunction or "ED" (difficulty getting or keeping an erection).
- Infertility (difficulty getting someone pregnant).
- Enlarged breasts.
- Lack of face or body hair.
- Thinning bones or anemia without a known cause.
- Loss of muscle mass.
For females, the test is mostly used for symptoms of high T levels.
Symptoms of high T may include:
- Abnormal hair growth on the body or face.
- Hair loss on the head that may be like male-pattern baldness (hair loss at the temples and balding on the top of the head).
- Voice changes.
- Irregular or no menstrual periods.
- Infertility (difficulty getting pregnant).
- Acne.
What happens during a testosterone levels test?
Most testosterone levels tests involve a blood draw in a medical setting. Your provider will take a blood sample in the morning, between 7 and 10. During these hours, your testosterone levels are typically the highest.
A health care professional will take a blood sample from a vein in your arm, using a small needle. After the needle is inserted, a small amount of blood will be collected into a test tube or vial. You may feel a little sting when the needle goes in or out. This usually takes less than five minutes.
You may be able to test your testosterone levels with an at-home kit. These have everything you need to collect a blood or saliva (spit) sample to send to a lab for testing. Talk to your provider if you think an at-home test is right for you. If you do a home test, be sure to follow your provider's instructions for collecting the sample and for returning the kit for testing.
Will I need to do anything to prepare for the test?
In certain cases, you may need to fast (not eat or drink) for several hours before the test. You may also need to stop taking certain medicines before this test, so tell your provider about everything you take. But don't stop taking any medicines unless your provider tells you to. Ask your provider how you should prepare for a testosterone levels test.
Are there any risks to the test?
There is very little risk to having a blood test. You may have slight pain or bruising at the spot where the needle was put in, but most symptoms go away quickly.
What do the results mean?
A testosterone level test alone can't diagnose any health conditions, but abnormal results with symptoms may be a sign of a health problem.
- In males, low T levels may be caused by different conditions, including:
- Problems with the testicles (the part of the male reproductive system that makes sperm), which are the main producers of testosterone in males.
- Chronic (long-lasting) diseases such as liver, or kidney disease.
- A pituitary gland disorder.
- Benign tumors (not cancer).
- Injury to the testicles.
- Alcohol use disorder (AUD).
- Certain genetic diseases such as Klinefelter syndrome.
- In females low T levels are normal, but extremely low levels may be a sign of:
- An adrenal gland disorder.
- A pituitary gland disorder.
- A disorder of the ovaries (the part of the female reproductive system that makes eggs).
- In males, high T levels may be caused by:
- A tumor in the testicles.
- Steroid use.
- An adrenal gland disorder, such as congenital adrenal hyperplasia (CAH).
- In females, high T levels may be caused by:
- Polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS).
- Ovarian cancer or other problems with the ovaries.
- An adrenal gland disorder, such as congenital adrenal hyperplasia (CAH).
- A disorder of the pituitary gland.
Your test results may mean different things depending on which test was done, your age, your symptoms, the results of other tests, and other conditions you may have. If your results are not normal, it doesn't always mean you have a medical condition that needs treatment. It's normal for testosterone levels to decrease with age. If you have questions about your results, talk to your provider.
Learn more about laboratory tests, reference ranges, and understanding results.
References
- Cleveland Clinic: Health Library: Diseases & Conditions [Internet]. Cleveland (OH): Cleveland Clinic; c2025. Low Testosterone in Women; [reviewed 2023 Apr 12; cited 2025 May 14]; [about 12 screens]. Available from: https://my.clevelandclinic.org/health/diseases/24897-low-testosterone-in-women
- Cleveland Clinic: Health Library: Articles [Internet]. Cleveland (OH): Cleveland Clinic; c2025. Testosterone; [reviewed 2022 Sep 01; cited 2025 May 13]; [about 16 screens]. Available from: https://my.clevelandclinic.org/health/articles/24101-testosterone
- Cleveland Clinic: Health Library: Diagnostics & Testing [Internet]. Cleveland (OH): Cleveland Clinic; c2025. Testosterone Test; [reviewed 2024 Sep 09; cited 2025 May 13]; [about 12 screens]. Available from: https://my.clevelandclinic.org/health/diagnostics/24215-testosterone-test
- Duca Y, Aversa A, Condorelli RA, Calogero AE, La Vignera S. Substance Abuse and Male Hypogonadism. J Clin Med. 2019 May 22 [cited 2025 May 13];8(5):732. doi: 10.3390/jcm8050732. PMID: 31121993; PMCID: PMC6571549. Available from: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6571549/
- Ferrucci L, Maggio M, Bandinelli S, Basaria S, Lauretani F, Ble A, Valenti G, Ershler WB, Guralnik JM, Longo DL. Low testosterone levels and the risk of anemia in older men and women. Arch Intern Med. 2006 Jul 10 [cited 2025 May 13];166(13):1380-8. doi: 10.1001/archinte.166.13.1380. PMID: 16832003; PMCID: PMC2645631. Available from: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2645631/
- Hormone Health Network [Internet]. Endocrine Society; c2025. Hypogonadism in Men; [2022 Jan 24; cited 2025 May 13]; [about 9 screens]. Available from: https://www.endocrine.org/patient-engagement/endocrine-library/hypogonadism
- Hormone Health Network [Internet]. Endocrine Society; c2025. Reproductive Hormones; [2022 Jan 24; cited 2025 May 13]; [about 18 screens]. Available from: https://www.endocrine.org/patient-engagement/endocrine-library/hormones-and-endocrine-function/reproductive-hormones
- LabCorp [Internet]. Burlington (NC): Laboratory Corporation of America(r) Holdings; c2025. Testosterone, Total; [cited 2025 May 13]; [about 8 screens]. Available from: https://www.labcorp.com/tests/004226/testosterone-total
- Mayo Clinic: Mayo Medical Laboratories [Internet]. Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research; c1995-2025. Test ID: TGRP: Testosterone, Total and Free, Serum: Clinical and Interpretive; [cited 2025 May 13]; [about 7 screens]. Available from: https://www.mayomedicallaboratories.com/test-catalog/Clinical+and+Interpretive/8508
- Mulhall JP, Trost LW, Brannigan RE et al: Evaluation and management of testosterone deficiency: AUA guideline [Internet]. Linthicum (MD): American Urology Association; 2018 [cited 2025 May 13]; 200: 423. Available from: https://www.auanet.org/guidelines-and-quality/guidelines/testosterone-deficiency-guideline
- Testing.com [Internet]. Seattle (WA).: OneCare Media; c2025. Liver Panel; [modified 2024 Feb 23; cited 2025 May 15]; [about 12 screens]. Available from: https://www.testing.com/tests/testosterone/
- WomensHealth.gov [Internet]. Washington DC: Office on Women's Health, U.S. Department of Health and Human Services; Polycystic Ovary Syndrome; [updated 2021 Feb 22; cited 2022 May 30]; [about 13 screens]. Available from: https://www.womenshealth.gov/a-z-topics/polycystic-ovary-syndrome
The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health.Testosterone is a vital hormone in men, responsible for initiating and driving the development of male secondary sexual characteristics during puberty—such as facial hair growth, voice deepening, and reproductive function. As men age, testosterone levels naturally decline in a process known as andropause or late-onset hypogonadism.
While idiopathic hypogonadism (low testosterone without a known cause) is most commonly diagnosed in men in their 50s and 60s, younger men can also experience low testosterone and related symptoms.
Symptoms of Testosterone Deficiency May Include:
- Reduced libido or sexual interest
- Difficulty achieving or maintaining erections
- Low energy or fatigue
- Decreased muscle mass and strength
- Reduced bone density
- Depressive symptoms
Testosterone Replacement Therapy (TRT)
TRT is an FDA-approved treatment option for men diagnosed with hypogonadism. Several delivery methods are available:
- Injectable Testosterone: Administered intramuscularly or subcutaneously. Some formulations can be self-injected at home, while long-acting versions may require administration by a healthcare provider.
- Testosterone Pellet Therapy: Involves a small incision to insert pellets into the gluteal fat tissue. These pellets release testosterone steadily over about three months and are ideal for those who prefer to avoid frequent injections.
- Topical Gels and Creams: Applied daily to areas like the outer arms, abdomen, or inner thighs. However, due to the risk of transference to others, alternative methods may be recommended in certain cases.
- Oral Testosterone: Newer formulations are processed through the lymphatic system, avoiding liver damage associated with older versions. Typically taken twice daily, this option is suitable for those who prefer to avoid needles.
- Your healthcare provider will help determine the most appropriate method based on your needs and preferences.
Monitoring and Side Effects
There are several physiologic side effects that should be closely monitored while a patient is on testosterone therapy, these include:
- Blood pressure changes
- Hematocrit levels (red blood cell concentration)
- Cholesterol levels
- Prostate health
- Blood testosterone levels
Possible Side Effects Include:
- Acne or oily skin
- Hair loss
- Mood changes
- Reduced sperm count, potentially leading to infertility
- Skin irritation (especially with topical applications)Defy Low T symptoms.
Testosterone Replacement Therapy Online
You don’t have to suffer in silence, or accept your symptoms as part of aging.
Testosterone Replacement Therapy is an ongoing treatment that can help with the life-derailing symptoms of Low T. As an online TRT clinic, Defy Medical offers expertly guided care via convenient telemedicine.
Get StartedPatients on a TRT protocol have reported results like:
- Stronger sex drive and improved sexual performance
- Relief from erectile dysfunction (ED)
- Easier time building muscle and recovering from workouts
- Improved body composition
- More energy and better sleep
- Less anxiety, depression, and mood swings
- More confidence
Do You Have Low T?
This quick questionnaire can tell you if you’re a potential candidate for Testosterone Replacement Therapy online. Just answer some simple questions about your symptoms.
*This test is meant to provide guidance and is not intended to be medical advice. Blood testing and consulting with a knowledgeable provider are required to diagnose low Testosterone.
Take the QuizDefy Medical offers extensive options.
Online TRT Clinic Treatment Options
We create an individualized plan based on your goals, comfort level, and blood test results.
Get StartedInjectable Testosterone
This is the most common delivery system and allows for careful control and quick adjustment of hormone levels.
Topical Testosterone
Testosterone can be absorbed through the skin using topical lotions and gels.
Testosterone Pellets
Pellets are implanted under the skin to deliver a steady dose of hormones over time.
Testosterone Nasal Gel
This gel delivers Testosterone via the nose and can be combined with other therapies for a Testosterone boost.
Supplemental Medication
These are prescribed to support a TRT protocol and can help with testicular health, fertility, estrogen levels, sex drive, and more.
Erectile Dysfunction Treatment
TRT typically relieves ED symptoms, but we also offer access to well-known ED medications like Sildenafil, Tadalafil, and Trimix (if appropriate).
No cookie-cutter plans. No more struggling to find a provider who gets it.
Defy Medical: Your Men’s Health Experts
For more than a decade, Defy Medical has offered Testosterone Replacement Therapy online. Led by Medical Director Dr. Justin Saya, our expert care team has guided thousands of patients to living happier, healthier lives – and we’re ready to help you.
With Defy Medical, you access:
Expert Care
Our care team specializes in Men’s Health and uses the latest research and advancements in TRT.
Convenient Telemedicine
Save time with virtual consultations with experienced HRT providers.
Individualized Care Plans
We go deeper to get to the root causes and create a protocol as unique as you are.
No Subscriptions or Contracts
You control your schedule and cost decisions, and only pay for what you need.
Extended 1-Hour Consults
Our providers listen. You can ask questions, discuss your most pressing symptoms, and more.
Access to TRT Options
Your Defy provider will discuss TRT options including injections, creams, pellets, and more.
Access to Easy Pharmacy Ordering
Conveniently order prescriptions, supplements, and supplies through our online patient portal for direct-to-door delivery.
A Variety of Health Services
We also offer ED treatments, injectable nutrition, Primary Care, and more.
Testimonials
Showing our most recent 4- & 5-star reviews.
See All 3777 Reviews on
“My struggle is many women’s and I feel better about the future.”
Visited on September 19, 2025
I just feel a little more confident in my outcome and am so hopeful of my bettering soon. Everything was covered well and I suddenly feel hopeful. That’s so important when one is struggling. I feel like she heard me and said let’s go. That’s what those of us deep in meno need. Very appreciative of the knowledge and the plan set forth. Super excellent outcome.
–Bettie B
“Lauren was great!”
Visited on September 19, 2025
Lauren listened to everything. She was very thorough!
–MINDY CARSWELL
“Description”
Visited on September 20, 2025
I learned what I was getting myself into.
–BYRON BULLOUGH
“Defy Medical provides knowledgeable…”
Visited on September 23, 2025
Defy Medical provides knowledgeable staff and reliable service, making the treatment process straightforward and supportive
–John Carter
“He was very through understood my needs…”
Visited on September 15, 2025
He was very through understood my needs and offered practical solutions. I do think he could have been a tiny bit more thorough to talk me through the prescriptions (how to inject, sighs to watch out for etc) but overall very pleased
–KRISTEN BEIZA
You Might Also Be Interested In
Erectile Dysfunction
There are solutions for this problem. Effective ED treatment can enhance your intimacy and boost your sexual performance, so you get back to living your best life.
Anabolic Androgenic Therapies
Anabolic hormones have two main effects: supporting sexual health, body composition, and encouraging tissue growth and healing.- What is Testosterone and Why is it So Important?
- What Are the Signs and Symptoms of Low Testosterone (Low T)?
- What Causes Testosterone Deficiency?
- Diagnosing Low Testosterone
- Benefits of Testosterone Replacement Therapy
- Testosterone Replacement Protocols and Treatment Options
- What Are the Risks of TRT? Is it Safe?
- Who is a Candidate for Testosterone Replacement?
- What Results Can You Expect From Testosterone Replacement Therapy?
- Lifestyle Factors for Optimizing Testosterone Therapy Results
- Testosterone Therapy for Mental Health and Wellbeing
- Testosterone and Aging - The Role in Longevity
- Inspiring Stories of Men Thriving with TRT
- When To Seek Treatment for Low Testosterone
- Finding a Qualified Testosterone Replacement Doctor
- Innovations in Testosterone Delivery Methods
Testosterone is the primary male sex hormone that is essential for men's health and wellbeing. As men age, testosterone levels naturally decline, leading to a condition known as low testosterone or 'Low T'. Low testosterone affects millions of men worldwide and can significantly reduce quality of life. The good news is that safe, effective treatment options exist in the form of testosterone replacement therapy (TRT). TRT can transform lives by alleviating undesirable symptoms of low testosterone. When delivered properly under medical supervision, it is one of the most beneficial therapies available to aging men today. This comprehensive guide will provide an in-depth look at TRT - who needs it, how it works, options available, and what results you can expect.
Testosterone is the primary male sex hormone that is mainly produced by the testicles. It plays a crucial role in male development and health. In men, testosterone is responsible for:
- Development of male reproductive tissues and maintenance of secondary sex characteristics - facial hair, deeper voice, muscle growth
- Sex drive (libido) and function
- Fat distribution
- Production of sperm and fertility
- Bone density and strength
- Red blood cell production
- Mood regulation and cognitive function
Healthy levels of testosterone are absolutely vital for men's overall wellbeing. When levels decline due to age or other causes, a range of undesirable effects occur.
Many men start experiencing signs and symptoms of low T from their 30s and 40s. Some common symptoms include:
- Reduced sex drive and erectile dysfunction
- Decreased muscle mass and strength
- Increased body fat, abdominal obesity
- Reduction in bone mineral density - higher fracture risk
- Depressive symptoms - low motivation, irritability, mood swings
- Fatigue, lack of energy and endurance
- Hair loss, loss of body and facial hair
- Sleep disturbances, insomnia
- Loss of libido and reduced fertility
- Cognitive decline - trouble concentrating, memory loss
The symptoms of low testosterone tend to be progressive and worsen over time. Many men simply accept them as an inevitable part of aging. However, the good news is treatment is available in the form of testosterone replacement therapy (TRT).
There are several potential causes of low testosterone in men:
- Aging - testosterone production declines naturally after age 30. Up to 40% of men over 50 may have low levels.
- Hypogonadism - testicular failure to produce adequate testosterone due to disease, infection, or genetic conditions.
- Obesity - increased aromatization of testosterone to estrogen in fatty tissues.
- Type 2 diabetes - poor blood glucose control impairs testosterone production.
- Medications - steroids, opioids, anticonvulsants, antidepressants, etc.
- Chronic illness - kidney or liver disease, cancer, HIV/AIDS, etc.
- Radiation treatment or chemotherapy for cancer - can damage testicular function.
- Traumatic injury to the testicles.
- Inherited conditions - e.g. Klinefelter syndrome where men have an extra X chromosome.
- Pituitary disorders - tumors, infections - interfering with signals for testosterone production.
- Alcoholism, opioid or cocaine abuse - impairs hormone production.
- Stress and poor sleep - elevates cortisol which reduces testosterone.
If low testosterone symptoms are impacting your life, lab testing can confirm if levels are low. A complete history, physical exam and appropriate diagnostic workup are needed to determine the underlying cause.
Diagnosing low T involves:
- Medical history - symptoms, family history, medication use, health conditions.
- Physical exam - assess body hair, gynecomastia, small testicles, other abnormalities.
- Symptom questionnaires - ADAM (Androgen Deficiency in Aging Males), AMS (Aging Males' Symptoms)
- Lab testing - usually two early morning blood samples for total and free testosterone levels. Levels below 300 ng/dL are considered low testosterone.
- Further testing may be needed to check luteinizing hormone (LH), follicle stimulating hormone (FSH), estradiol, and prolactin levels to pinpoint the cause.
Getting an accurate diagnosis from a trained hormone specialist is key prior to starting any treatment. Beware of "low T centers" diagnosing solely based on symptoms and a single questionable lab test.
Testosterone replacement therapy (TRT) involves restoring testosterone levels with medications delivered via injections, gels, patches or other means. When properly implemented and monitored, TRT offers life-changing benefits:
- Restores sex drive & sexual function - improves libido, erection quality, orgasm intensity.
- Increases lean muscle mass & strength - helps counteract age-related muscle loss (sarcopenia).
- Reduces body fat - helps flatten abdomen, trim waistline.
- Improves mood & motivation - reduces depression, irritability.
- Sharpened cognition & memory - improved concentration, mental clarity.
- Increased bone density - higher bone strength, reduced fracture risk.
- Boosts energy & endurance - greater capacity for activity and exercise.
- Increased fertility - improves sperm count and motility.
- Cardioprotective benefits - lowers risk factors for heart disease.
- Reduced mortality risk - testosterone therapy may help men live longer.
With lifelong TRT, many men report feeling 20 years younger - with restored vitality and overall wellness.
There are several options available for testosterone replacement therapy. Under supervision of an experienced hormone specialist, a personalized treatment protocol can be tailored to your needs and preferences.
Testosterone injections are a common TRT option. Testosterone cypionate, enanthate or undecanoate in oil are typically administered every 1-2 weeks. This provides stable testosterone levels but requires frequent injections.
Testosterone gels (Androgel, Testim) are applied daily to skin and absorbed into the bloodstream. Gel application can be messy and doses may transfer to partners or children.
Testosterone patches (Androderm) release testosterone continuously through skin. But some men have skin reactions and patches may detach with swimming or activity.
long-acting testosterone therapy implanted under the skin every 3-6 months provide sustained release of hormones without need for daily dosing. However, slow-release dose extrusion and infection can sometimes occur.
Nasal gels (Natesto) and buccal patches (Striant) are newer alternative delivery methods currently gaining popularity.
Finding the optimal form and dose of testosterone therapy takes some trial and error. Monitoring with lab work helps ensure levels are normalized without excessive elevation.
Like any medical treatment, testosterone therapy does have some potential risks and side effects:
- Increased red blood cell production - rare risk of clots
- Prostate enlargement (benign) and growth of any hidden cancers
- Gynecomastia - breast tissue growth
- Acne and oily skin
- Testicular atrophy due to reduced natural production
- Sleep apnea exacerbation in those prone to it
- Edema - fluid retention, high blood pressure
- Unwanted body hair growth, male pattern baldness
However, risks are low when TRT is properly implemented and monitored under medical guidance. Key is keeping testosterone levels in the normal healthy range - not too high or too low.
Careful screening prior helps identify those not suitable for TRT - active prostate or breast cancer, severe urinary symptoms, uncontrolled heart disease, etc.
TRT should begin with conservative doses, adjusted based on follow up labwork and symptom response. Ongoing lab monitoring of prostate health, hematocrit, cardiovascular parameters and other potential adverse effects is imperative.
With responsible testosterone therapy and medical oversight, the substantial benefits far outweigh potential risks for most men.
The key indicator is presence of low testosterone symptoms that significantly impair quality of life. Specific guidelines suggest TRT may be appropriate for men with:
- Total testosterone <300 ng/dL on two lab tests
- Free testosterone <5-9 ng/dL plus symptoms
- Signs and symptoms of low T
- No contraindications to TRT
Ideally, candidates for testosterone therapy should be 35 years old. Treatment is generally not advisable for younger men since low T may recover naturally.
Those with breast or prostate cancer, severe lower urinary tract symptoms, uncontrolled heart disease, or other serious medical conditions may not be suitable for TRT. Your physician will carefully determine if you are a good candidate.
TRT can transform lives when correctly done. However, the degree of symptom improvement varies from person to person.
Most men report noticeable improvements in libido, erectile function, energy, body composition, and sense of vitality around 4-6 weeks after starting treatment. Maximal benefits may take 3-6 months.
It takes time and perseverance to find your ideal dose, frequency, and delivery method. Doses may need adjustment based on follow up lab work and symptom response.
Patience and commitment to TRT under your doctor's guidance provides the best chance for satisfying results. Completely restoring peak youthful testosterone levels is unrealistic, but substantial improvements are readily achievable.
With appropriate treatment, you can expect to feel more like your younger self - energized, mentally sharp, sexually potent, and physically fit. Consistency is key.
Some lifestyle measures that may optimize the benefits of TRT include:
Weight loss for obese men - being overweight increases aromatase activity which converts testosterone to estrogens. Losing belly fat helps increase free testosterone.
Exercise - strength training helps build muscle, cardiovascular exercise enhances blood flow. But don't overtrain which can have the opposite effect.
Healthy diet - ensure adequate intake of fats, minerals like zinc and magnesium, and nutrients that support T production.
Stress management - chronic stress elevates cortisol which inhibits testosterone. Try meditation, yoga, or deep breathing daily.
Good sleep habits - aim for 7-9 hours nightly, avoid sleep deprivation. Melatonin supplements can help with sleep quality.
Reduce alcohol - heavy drinking lowers testosterone substantially. Follow safe drinking guidelines.
Stop smoking - smoking reduces serum testosterone and sperm production.
Making positive lifestyle modifications amplifies the benefits of TRT for overall men's health. Discuss specific recommendations with your hormone specialist.
Emerging research shows testosterone therapy can provide significant mental health benefits beyond just libido and sexual function.
Studies demonstrate TRT can alleviate depressive symptoms in men with low testosterone. Optimizing testosterone eases irritability, fatigue, apathy and restores drive and motivation.
Cognitive function also improves with testosterone normalization - sharper focus, improved working memory, enhanced visuospatial abilities.
By modulating neurochemicals in the brain, testosterone elevates mood, reduces anxiety and promotes an overall sense of wellbeing. The effects are often substantial.
For men struggling with low motivation, emotional blunting and reduced cognitive performance, testosterone therapy often provides drastic relief when properly implemented under a doctor's care.
There is emerging evidence that maintaining youthful testosterone levels as men grow older may help slow aspects of the aging process.
Studies show low testosterone is predictive of increased cardiovascular disease, obesity, metabolic syndrome, osteoporosis, and mortality risk.
Conversely, research suggests testosterone therapy may help mitigate age-related declines in muscle, bone, sexual function, mood, and cognitive ability.
Though more studies are needed, testosterone therapy holds promise for enhancing healthy lifespan and improving quality of life as men enter their senior years.
Under medical guidance, TRT allows men to preserve their vitality, independence, and productivity well into old age. By preventing a downward spiral of deterioration, testosterone optimizes successful aging.
Countless men feel they've gotten their lives back after starting testosterone replacement. Here are some inspiring patient stories:
"My energy levels were in the gutter. I had zero sex drive and was seriously depressed. TRT completely turned all of that around. I feel like a new man - happy, energetic, and fully engaged in life." - John D.
"Bone density scans showed I was heading for osteoporosis. A year into testosterone therapy, my new scan was completely normal. My doctor said it was remarkable progress."- Michael R.
"I thought my career was over. I couldn't concentrate or keep up with the daily mental demands of my high pressure job. TRT brought my sharpness and quick thinking back. I'm thriving again." - Thomas L.
"My physique was wasting away no matter how hard I trained. After starting TRT, I put on 12 pounds of lean muscle and dropped 3 inches off my waist - at age 50. My body responds like I'm in my 20s." - Chris B.
With appropriate treatment, you too can become a success story! Take control of your health by exploring testosterone therapy.
The adverse effects of low testosterone often develop gradually over years. Many men chalk up symptoms like low energy and reduced sex drive to normal aging. But low T should not be ignored.
Prolonged testosterone deficiency causes progressive worsening of symptoms that increasingly impair quality of life. Muscle wasting accelerates, cognition and mood continue to decline, and overall health spirals downward.
The key is to recognize low testosterone symptoms early and seek treatment promptly. With proper diagnosis and timely testosterone replacement under medical supervision, the downward trajectory can be reversed.
Many men find it life-changing to restore their energy, physique, sex drive, mood and overall vitality back to youthful levels with TRT. The sooner treatment is started, the better the results.
Do not wait until symptoms become severe. Consult a physician specializing in testosterone and hormone health for proper evaluation. Embrace a proactive approach to rapidly improve your wellbeing.
You deserve to feel and function at your best regardless of age. Take action at the first signs of low testosterone to regain your peak performance and live life to the fullest.
Choosing the right physician is absolutely vital for successful testosterone replacement therapy (TRT). Here are essential tips for finding a qualified testosterone doctor:
- Seek out an endocrinologist, urologist or men's health specialist who is extensively trained and experienced in TRT.
- Confirm they perform an extensive initial health screening and full lab panel - not just a single testosterone blood test.
- Ensure they monitor your health and labs at regular intervals to calibrate dosing and check for potential side effects.
- Select a doctor willing to work with you to tailor a personalized treatment plan - not take a "one size fits all" approach.
- Choose a physician who addresses your symptoms and goals with TRT, not just lab numbers. Relief of symptoms is the ultimate objective.
- Opt for a doctor who explains options thoroughly and involves you in treatment decisions.
- Avoid doctors attempting to sell you their own branded testosterone products or supplements.
- Be wary of "Low T" clinics diagnosed solely based on symptoms or questionable lab testing.
- Read online reviews carefully but realize that each patient's experience varies.
The right TRT doctor will thoughtfully design a treatment regimen to meet your individual needs, closely monitor your progress, and work collaboratively with you for optimal outcomes. This takes time but is worth the effort.
There have been exciting recent advances in testosterone replacement therapy delivery methods, providing more options for convenience, effectiveness and patient preference:
- Transdermal gels - Newer gels like Axiron are applied to the underarms to avoid transfer to partners or children.
- Compounding pharmacies offer custom topical lotions, creams and gels tailored to your needs.
- Oral dissolving tablets - Placed under the tongue, bypassing the liver which oral capsules pass through.
- Nasal gels like Natesto offer ease of application plus reliable absorption.
- Buccal testosterone tablets - Placed between the upper lip and gum, directly entering circulation.
- Longer-acting injections - Testosterone undecanoate (Nebido) lasts up to 3 months per injection.
- Ester-filled testosterone implants - Provide steady release for 4-6 month durations.
These newer innovations provide excellent alternatives to traditional injections or topical TRT. Discuss options with a knowledgeable hormone specialistTestosterone Replacement Therapy: Benefits, Options, Cost, & More
While everyone’s body produces the natural hormone testosterone, it’s often associated and more highly concentrated in men. Essentially, testosterone is a hormone created predominately in the testicles and helps maintain your body’s healthy bone density, fat distribution, muscular strength and mass, facial and body hair, red blood cell production, sex drive, and sperm production.
As men age, testosterone levels naturally and slowly decline, which can worsen physiological conditions, general health levels, and quality of life. To help reduce the effects of decreased testosterone levels and negatively-correlated symptoms, Testosterone Replacement Therapy (TRT) can be a promising option. However, it’s important to note that there are a lot of misconceptions about what the treatment can and can’t do for individuals.
Let’s take a closer look at what TRT is, its potential benefits, financial costs, and the types of TRT treatments that are commonly available.
What is Testosterone Replacement Therapy?
TRT is a treatment that medical professionals often prescribe to men who have testosterone deficiency and are showing symptoms of hypogonadism. Getting prescription testosterone has been proven to help restore the levels of this hormone in the blood, reversing the symptoms of low testosterone. Many men who take it can notice improvements in alertness, sexual function, energy levels, mood, and more.
Medical professionals typically prescribe TRT to males who have hypogonadism. To get a definitive evaluation, blood tests must show that an individual has low testosterone levels, which the American Urological Association defines as being below 300 nanograms per deciliter (ng/dl). Individuals usually have to also be experiencing other symptoms, including fatigue, breast growth, and sexual dysfunction.
If you are experiencing symptoms of low testosterone, you likely don’t feel as good as you should. Beyond day-to-day symptoms, low levels of testosterone can also impact your body’s ability to carry out critical functions, which can increase your risk for other serious health concerns, such as type 2 diabetes and cardiovascular disease.
Symptoms do vary for each person, but if you experience several or all of the symptoms below, it’s worth getting your T levels checked:
- Decreased muscular strength and stamina
- Low sex drive
- Erectile difficulties
- Diminished sperm volume
- Unusual weight gain or body fat redistribution
- Changes in Mood
How Much Does TRT Cost?
For most patients, TRT doesn’t have to be very costly. Additionally, the majority of health insurance companies cover a wide range of testosterone replacement therapy forms, which means you’ll. Co-pays can range anywhere from $30-$100 per month, depending on your location, treatment schedule, and insurance plan. Generic options also help reduce out-of-pocket expenses for TRT.
Without insurance, TRT injections are usually the least costly type and can range from $50 to $100 per month. Solutions in the form of gels, creams, and patches usually range between $200 and $500 per month.
TRT is a great option for restoring and bolstering your overall health, wellness, and sense of well being. But remember that costs and types of treatment may vary depending on your needs. Be sure to consult with your primary doctor to figure out the best methods for TRT for you.
Is TRT Right for You?
If you or a loved one are experiencing symptoms of low testosterone, be sure to consult with your primary care physician. A healthcare professional can detail the benefits of testosterone replacement therapy, any potential risks, and work with you to formulate a treatment plan.
The official U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) does warn about the potential risk of heart attacks and strokes for some individuals receiving TRT (FDA, 2018). Testosterone treatment can also have side effects like infertility. Additionally, it may not be a good solution for you if you have certain medical conditions, such as prostate cancer.
At Renewed Vitality, we always strive to give patients the most natural results possible with the least amount of side effects. That’s why every hormone replacement treatment option we offer, including those for testosterone replacement therapy, uses bioidentical hormones. To better consider your potential TRT treatment options, contact us today to get started!Locations:
AdvertisementAdvertisement
Testosterone replacement therapy (TRT) can help improve the symptoms of low testosterone due to male hypogonadism. TRT has certain risks and benefits, so your healthcare provider will carefully evaluate if it’s safe and right for you.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services. Policy
Testosterone replacement therapy (TRT) is an option for men who have low testosterone levels due to male hypogonadism. TRT involves taking manufactured forms of testosterone to regulate your levels of this hormone.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services. Policy
TRT comes with certain risks and benefits. Together, you and your healthcare provider will decide if TRT is right for you.
The U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approves testosterone replacement therapy for males who have low testosterone levels due to a known medical condition (hypogonadism).
Hypogonadism can develop from damage to or malfunction of one of the following organs that are part of testosterone production:
For example, chemotherapy or radiation therapy can damage one of these organs. Or you may have a genetic condition that causes issues.
The FDA doesn’t approve the use of TRT for males with low testosterone without an associated medical condition. As of 2025, it’s not yet approved for males who naturally experience a decline in testosterone as they age.
TRT isn’t for everyone. Certain existing health conditions make it unsafe, like prostate cancer and heart failure.
Before starting TRT, your healthcare provider will make sure low testosterone is an accurate diagnosis. They’ll also make sure TRT is safe for you. They’ll ask about your medical history and do a physical exam. They may order the following blood tests:
- Two morning testosterone tests (for diagnosis)
- Hemoglobin
- Hematocrit
- Liver function tests
- Luteinizing hormone blood test
- PSA (prostate-specific antigen) test
- Prolactin blood test
Advertisement
With TRT, you take a manufactured form of testosterone to regulate your levels. This can help improve the symptoms of low testosterone, like low libido and lack of energy.
TRT doesn’t fix or cure the underlying cause of low testosterone. In fact, it will cause your testicles to stop working. This means that you’ll need the medication to continue having a normal level of testosterone in your body. If you stop taking testosterone, your body will have to recover its ability to make testosterone again.
Testosterone replacement therapy has several different forms, including:
- Testosterone skin gels. You apply the gel every day to clean, dry skin as directed. It’s important that you don’t transfer the gel to another person through skin-to-skin contact while the gel is wet. Testosterone skin gels are one of the most common forms of TRT in the U.S.
- Intramuscular testosterone injections. You give the injections into a muscle every one to two weeks. Some formulations of long-acting testosterone can be given by injection every 10 weeks. But you have to get them in a medical office.
- Subcutaneous testosterone injections. You give the injections under your skin every week.
- Testosterone patches. You apply these patches every day to your skin as directed. You usually have to switch up their location to avoid skin reactions.
- Testosterone pellets. A provider implants these pellets under your skin every three to six months. The pellets provide consistent and long-term testosterone dosages.
- Buccal testosterone tablets. These are sticky pills that you apply to your gums twice a day. The testosterone absorbs quickly into your bloodstream through your gums.
- Testosterone nasal gel. You apply a testosterone gel into each nostril three times a day.
- Oral testosterone. This is a pill you take twice a day.
Your healthcare provider will work with you to figure out which option is best for you. After you start TRT, you’ll need follow-up testing. This includes monitoring your testosterone level and getting other blood tests to make sure TRT isn’t harming your health.
Testosterone replacement therapy can improve many of the symptoms of low testosterone (male hypogonadism). TRT may improve your:
- Sexual function
- Lean body mass
- Bone mineral density
- Mood
- Energy levels
- Sense of well-being
But it’s important to remember that TRT comes with potential risks and side effects.
The side effects of testosterone replacement therapy include:
- Acne or oily skin
- Swelling in your ankles caused by mild fluid retention
- Stimulation of your prostate, which can cause urinary symptoms
- Breast enlargement (gynecomastia) or tenderness
- Worsening of sleep apnea
- Smaller testicles
- Skin irritation (if you use topical testosterone replacement)
- Decrease in sperm count, leading to infertility
Laboratory abnormalities that can happen while on TRT include:
- Increase in prostate-specific antigen (PSA) level
- Increase in red blood cell count, which thickens your blood
It may take a few weeks before you start noticing differences in your body and mood once starting TRT. How long it takes varies from person to person. To allow the therapy to take full effect, healthcare providers typically wait 30 days after you start TRT to check your testosterone levels.
Advertisement
If you don’t notice an improvement in your symptoms after taking TRT for three to six months, your provider may recommend stopping the therapy. This is because if your symptoms don’t improve, your testosterone level may not be the cause of your symptom.
You can stay on testosterone replacement therapy for as long as it’s benefiting your symptoms and not causing health issues. TRT is meant to be a long-term therapy. If you stop taking testosterone, your levels will return to baseline.
Your healthcare provider will recommend regular testing to make sure TRT isn’t hurting your health.
Yes, you can stop TRT once you’ve started. You may do this for several reasons, like if:
- You have bothersome side effects
- The therapy isn’t improving your symptoms
- You develop a health condition that makes TRT unsafe
If you stop TRT, you’ll return to your normal level of testosterone. Your body will take some time to restart production of testosterone naturally.
Once you start TRT, you’ll have regular appointments with your healthcare provider and routine blood tests. Your provider will let you know how often you need to do this.
Otherwise, see your healthcare provider if:
- You don’t notice an improvement in your symptoms
- The side effects of TRT are causing you distress
- You want to try a different form of testosterone
- You’re thinking of stopping TRT
- You develop a health condition that could make TRT unsafe
Advertisement
TRT can be dangerous for some people because it can make certain health conditions worse. You shouldn’t use TRT if you have:
- Untreated heart failure
- Untreated obstructive sleep apnea
- Had a heart attack or stroke within the past six months
- A history of elevated red blood cell counts
- Untreated prostate cancer
- An unevaluated lump on your prostate
- Male breast cancer
You should also avoid TRT if you’re planning to have biological children. TRT can decrease sperm count and cause fertility issues. Trying to repair your fertility after TRT can be very expensive and take a long time.
TRT is meant for medical purposes. It’s not worth the potential health risks to use testosterone for nonmedical reasons, like bodybuilding or attempting to prevent aging changes.
Certain existing health conditions make TRT unsafe, like prostate cancer, breast cancer and heart failure. This is why healthcare providers do extensive evaluations and tests before approving the use of TRT. If you don’t have these health concerns, TRT is generally safe.
But there aren’t many studies on the long-term effects of TRT (for example, over decades). And some of the studies have mixed results.
For example, some studies suggest that TRT decreases your risk of heart attack over time, while others say it increases your risk. In 2015, the FDA warned that testosterone use is possibly associated with increased cardiovascular risk based on the results of two studies. However, in 2024 the results of a large, randomized trial found that testosterone gel wasn’t associated with increased heart risks over a medium-length period of time. Research has also studied the increased risk of venous thromboembolism, and the results are mixed.
Advertisement
For all these reasons, your healthcare provider will carefully consider if TRT is safe for you based on your unique characteristics.
If symptoms of low testosterone are interfering with your quality of life, know that you don’t have to just grin and bear it. Testosterone replacement therapy may be an option for you. Together, you and your healthcare provider will weigh the risks and benefits of TRT to see if it could help. Don’t hesitate to ask questions or voice your concerns. Your provider is there to support you in all aspects of your health.
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 01/16/2025.
Learn more about the Health Library and our editorial process.
AdvertisementAdvertisement
Ad
Rendered: Sun Oct 19 2025 04:45:40 GMT+0000 (Coordinated Universal Time)Testosterone Replacement Therapy (TRT) for Optimal Men’s Health
by Men's Health Clinic
- Global Leader: 12+ Years in the Industry
- 150,000+ successfully treated patients
- Thousands of 5-star reviews
Find out if you need TRT
Take the quizby Men's Health Clinic
- Global Leader: 12+ Years in the Industry
- 150,000+ successfully treated patients
- Thousands of 5-star reviews
Find out if you need TRT
Take the quizTestosterone Replacement Therapy
Men commonly suffer from the negative health effects of testosterone loss as hormone levels decline with age. Symptoms include fatigue, loss of muscle mass, loss of bone mass, low mood, and a lack of sex drive, which can result in reduced performance, including erectile dysfunction (ED) and premature ejaculation (PE).
Testosterone plays a critical role in maintaining overall male health. Testosterone deficiency (TD) can lead to serious health consequences over time, making early treatment vital for reversing its damaging effects.
Do you have TD? Find out with our 2-minute quiz.
Take the quizTestosterone Deficiency?
Unsure if you are suffering from Testosterone Deficiency? Complete our FREE quiz to find out!
Low testosterone
So, you have discovered that you may have testosterone deficiency (TD). This is not cause for alarm. In fact, it could be the beginning of your journey towards improved bedroom health.
Medical science has advanced significantly to provide you with solutions to the common problem of TD. You can improve your health and minimise the impact of ageing by working with Men’s Health Clinic to get you back to optimal health.
Low testosterone
Low on Testosterone?
Find out with our 2-minute quiz.
Take the quizGet treated for other related conditions
Erectile Dysfunction (ED)
Learn more
Premature Ejaculation (PE)
Learn more
FAQsTransform Your Health with an Expert in Testosterone Optimization Therapy
Unlock Your Full Potential with Personalized Hormone Management
Get Started Today
The Process
Take the Low-T Quiz
Step One
Complete your medical history form
Connect with a Patient Coordinator & answer a few simple questions
and get your personalized treatment plan started.
Step Two
Discuss your therapy with a Renew doctor
Consult with a Renew Vitality Hormone Specialist with extensive experience
in hormone therapy & optimization.
Step Three
Customized therapy, confidential delivery
Your tailored program is discreetly delivered to your doorstep with your
Patient Coordinator on call when you're ready.
Reclaim Your Youth With Testosterone Replacement Therapy and Renew Vitality
As a team of healthcare professionals with decades of combined experience, we proudly offer a level of care and professionalism in locations across the U.S. We focus our efforts on providing superior results in hormone replacement therapy and integrated lifestyle and wellness programs.
Testosterone Optimization
Testosterone is the primary hormone in men responsible for energy, bone density, muscle strength, and sexual performance. In essence, this hormone is what makes a man masculine. Testosterone replacement therapy utilizes testosterone chemical compounds to help replenish low testosterone levels and boost them to optimal standards.
Hormone Replacement Therapy
Hormonal imbalance occurs when the body decreases the production of specific hormones necessary to regulate how our bodies function, leading to physical issues like weight gain and sexual dysfunction. Hormone replacement therapy (HRT) can help restore and maintain a man’s hormonal balance by utilizing natural or synthetic hormones to replenish the loss of hormones naturally produced by the human body.
Growth Hormone Therapy
The human growth hormone (HGH) is essential for human growth, cell regeneration, and cell reproduction. It also regulates cholesterol, bone density, muscle composition, body fat, and metabolism. HGH Therapy can increase human growth hormone levels to maximum output and help maintain physical performance and function.
Sexual Health
Erectile dysfunction and premature ejaculation can lead to decreased sexual desire, depression, and irritability, affecting the overall sexual health of your relationship. Unfortunately, these sexual dysfunctions are linked to several factors, including psychological and physical health issues. Sexual dysfunction treatments incorporate a combination of therapies, including HGH and Trimix injections, to help restore and enhance sexual function, performance, and desire.
Fat Loss
High blood sugar and chronic overeating can cause obesity and chronic weight gain, leading to serious medical conditions such as high blood pressure, heart disease, and diabetes. However, by stimulating the regulation of certain hormones, adults suffering from chronic weight gain can modify their bodies’ behavior to reduce unwanted fat. Weight loss therapy combines Semaglutide weight loss injections with a comprehensive exercise and nutritional diet plan to help suppress chronic overeating and lower blood glucose levels.
Performance Supplements
Vitality Performance Supplements are designed to optimize health, energy, and vitality at every stage of life. Crafted with high-quality, science-backed ingredients, our supplements support key areas like muscle recovery, cognitive function, and overall wellness. Our carefully formulated and tested products provide the essential nutrients your body needs to perform at its best. With a commitment to purity, potency, and effectiveness, Vitality Performance Supplements help you unlock your full potential and take control of your health.
What makes Renew Vitality the Best in Testosterone Replacement Therapy?
It’s our people. From our network of experienced doctors to our patient coordinators, every patient experiences the best in care. We specialize in helping men regain their strength, confidence, and vitality through expert-driven Testosterone Replacement Therapy (TRT). With a team of experienced medical professionals, a patient-first approach, and customized treatment plans, we ensure that every patient receives the care they need to feel and perform at their best. Our concierge-style service provides ongoing support, advanced diagnostic testing, and cutting-edge therapies tailored to your individual hormone levels and health goals. From optimizing testosterone levels to enhancing overall well-being, Renew Vitality delivers proven results with a commitment to safety, efficacy, and long-term success.
Low testosterone can impact nearly every aspect of a man’s life, causing symptoms such as fatigue, brain fog, weight gain, decreased muscle mass, low libido, erectile dysfunction, mood swings, and poor sleep. Left untreated, these issues can lead to more serious health concerns, including increased risk of heart disease, osteoporosis, and metabolic disorders. Renew Vitality’s TRT programs are designed to restore optimal hormone balance, helping men regain their energy, mental clarity, and drive. With our expert guidance and tailored treatment protocols, you can take control of your health and reclaim the vitality you deserve.
Dr. Gary T. Marshall
Dr. Gary T. Marshall, MD, FACS practices in the New York City area and specializes in general surgery and critical care medicine.
Renew Vitality Will Help Relieve Low-T Symptoms
Low testosterone or testosterone deficiency can adversely affect your everyday life. Reduced testosterone can cause a decrease in sexual desire and lead to erectile dysfunction. In addition, it can cause mood swings, irritability, and depression, which can affect your interactions with fellow employees and family members.
Low testosterone can also cause your body to deteriorate and become vulnerable to other severe medical conditions. By adversely affecting these aspects of your life, low testosterone can drastically affect your overall wellness and happiness.
Improve Your
Quality Of Life
What is testosterone?
At Renew Vitality, we personalize your wellness program to highlight and address your specific concerns and ailments. Never taking the cookie-cutter approach to physical health, your Renew Vitality health partner works to guide you through your own personal wellness program.
Combining hormone replacement therapy with a comprehensive diet and exercise program, your journey with us is engineered to deliver uncompromised, optimal health and wellness.
FEELING RUN DOWN?
TAKE THE LOW-T QUIZ TODAY
Our men’s clinic can restore your physiology, change your body composition and optimize your health to slow down aging and prevent health complications caused by low testosterone.
Take back your life and become a better you today!
We are Dedicated to Helping You Optimize Your Testosterone Levels
Our Commitment to Your Health
Personalized
Hormone Therapy
At Renew Vitality, we specialize in safe and effective hormone replacement therapy to help men restore energy, strength, and confidence. Our expert team creates customized treatment plans to optimize testosterone levels and improve overall health.
Comprehensive Treatment Options
Tailored Programs for
Renewed Vitality
Our approach focuses on achieving long-term success through science-backed solutions. Our services and performance supplements provide comprehensive solutions tailored to each patient. You have goals, we can help you get there.
Nationwide Clinics & Expert Care
Convenient Locations
Across the U.S.
With Renew Vitaility clinics nationwide, our specialists provide personalized care wherever you are. Experience world-class treatment in a comfortable, professional setting designed to help you regain vitality and live your best life.Testosterone Replacement Therapy in Patients with Low Testosterone: Findings from TRAVERSE Trial
A Cleveland Clinic-led trial found that testosterone-replacement therapy did not result in a higher incidence of major adverse cardiac events in middle-aged and older men with hypogonadism (also known as low testosterone) who also had preexisting or a high risk of cardiovascular disease. However, researchers still urge caution when considering testosterone therapy. Dr. Steve Nissen discusses the results of the TRAVERSE trial.
Learn more about clinical trials in the Heart, Vascular and Thoracic Institute at Cleveland Clinic
Subscribe: Apple Podcasts | Podcast Addict | Buzzsprout | Spotify
Testosterone Replacement Therapy in Patients with Low Testosterone: Findings from TRAVERSE Trial
Podcast Transcript
Announcer:
Welcome to Cleveland Clinic Cardiac Consult, brought to you by The Sydell and Arnold Miller Family Heart, Vascular and Thoracic Institute at Cleveland Clinic.
Steven Nissen, MD:
I'm Dr. Steve Nissen. I'm the Chief Academic Officer of the Heart, Vascular and Thoracic Institute at Cleveland Clinic. I'd like to talk to you today about the TRAVERSE trial. This was a study recently published in the New England Journal of Medicine that had the long-awaited data on the cardiovascular safety of testosterone replacement in men with hypogonadism. This study was conducted as a consequence of a mandate from the Food and Drug Administration to the makers of testosterone. The FDA was concerned because there was some preliminary data that suggested that testosterone may have adverse cardiovascular effects, specifically that it could increase the risk of heart attack or stroke.
The study involved randomization of about 5,200 men between the ages of 45 and 80. They had to have documented low testosterone levels, less than 300 nanograms per deciliter on two separate occasions obtained in the morning, which is the proper time to draw a testosterone level. If their level was low and they had associated symptoms such as impaired sexual function, easy fatiguability, loss of hair in their beards and other places that are known to be related to testosterone, they had to have some of those symptoms to get into the trial. The randomization was to a placebo or testosterone gel delivered transdermal, 1.62 percent testosterone. Then patients were followed, and their testosterone blood levels were checked, and the dose was adjusted to get them into the normal range of 350 to 750 nanograms per deciliter.
The primary endpoint of the trial was a non-inferiority endpoint that collected events of death from cardiovascular causes, non-fatal myocardial infarction or non-fatal stroke. Patients were treated for an average of 21.7 months and followed for a median of 33 months. At the end of the trial when we were unblinded, we learned that a primary endpoint had occurred in 7 percent of patients in the testosterone group and 7.3 percent of patients in the placebo group. That was a neutral hazard ratio of 0.96 and the upper confidence interval was 1.17. The FDA required an upper confidence interval of less than 1.5 for a declaration of non-inferiority, and that upper confidence interval was easily met.
So, what did we learn from the trial? Well, we learned that testosterone administration to men with hypogonadism, well-documented and titrated carefully to obtain normal testosterone levels, that in that setting, testosterone administration is safe. We did not study the use of testosterone outside of this very clearly defined patient group, and we caution that testosterone should not be used by athletes or bodybuilders. It should not be used by men who do not have documented low testosterone levels. And it needs to be administered by someone with experience in treating hypogonadism. Generally, that's an endocrinologist or a urologist, but it can be others, and the patients be followed very closely.
We did see an increased risk of atrial fibrillation and thromboembolic events. There was a numerical excess of pulmonary emboli and other peripheral venous thrombosis events. So, testosterone should be used cautiously in patients with these conditions. However, overall, the cardiovascular safety of testosterone was confirmed in the TRAVERSE trial, and we think it should guide informed discussions between patients and providers about the optimal use of testosterone.
Announcer:
Thank you for listening. We hope you enjoyed the podcast. We welcome your comments and feedback. Please contact us at heart@ccf.org. Like what you heard? Subscribe wherever you get your podcasts or listen at clevelandclinic.org/cardiacconsultpodcast.
Cardiac Consult
A Cleveland Clinic podcast exploring heart, vascular and thoracic topics of interest to healthcare providers: medical and surgical treatments, diagnostic testing, medical conditions, and research, technology and practice issues.Locations:
AdvertisementAdvertisement
Healthcare providers mainly order testosterone blood tests for males who have signs of low testosterone and females who have signs of high testosterone. Abnormal testosterone levels can point to several different health issues.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services. Policy
Care at Cleveland Clinic
A testosterone test is a blood test that measures your levels of testosterone, a hormone.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services. Policy
Your gonads (sex organs) mainly produce testosterone. More specifically, the testicles in males and the ovaries in females make testosterone. Levels of testosterone are naturally much higher in males.
Your body functions best when your testosterone is in a certain range. A testosterone level that’s too low or high can cause health problems regardless of your sex. Your healthcare provider may recommend this test if you have symptoms that could point to high or low testosterone.
Testosterone in your body exists in free (not attached to anything) and bound (attached to proteins) forms. Free testosterone is easier for your body to use. A testosterone blood test may show:
- Total testosterone, which measures both free and attached testosterone.
- Free testosterone, which shows free testosterone only. This test may be more helpful for diagnosing certain medical conditions.
Healthcare providers mainly recommend testosterone tests for males who’ve gone through puberty and have symptoms of low testosterone, like:
- Erectile dysfunction.
- Infertility.
- Low libido (low sex drive).
- Loss of armpit and pubic hair.
- Low muscle mass.
- Gynecomastia.
Healthcare providers mainly order testosterone tests for females who have symptoms of high testosterone, like:
Advertisement
- Acne.
- Excess facial or body hair (hirsutism).
- Irregular periods.
- Voice deepening.
- Infertility.
If you’re taking masculinizing hormone therapy, your provider will likely recommend regular testosterone blood tests to make sure your testosterone dose is working well for you.
Your child’s healthcare provider may recommend a testosterone blood test if your child has signs of starting puberty earlier or later than expected. High levels may point to precocious (early) puberty. Low levels may indicate a delay in sexual development.
If you’re getting a total testosterone blood test, you may need to get it in the morning since testosterone levels are highest then. In some cases, your healthcare provider may ask you to fast (not eat or drink anything except water) several hours before the test.
Your provider will let you know if you need to follow any specific instructions.
You can expect the following during a blood test:
- You’ll sit in a chair, and a healthcare provider (usually a phlebotomist) will check your arms for an easily accessible vein. This is usually on the inside bend of your elbow.
- Once they’ve located a vein, they’ll clean and disinfect the area.
- They’ll then insert a small needle into your vein to take a blood sample. This may feel like a small pinch.
- After they insert the needle, they’ll collect a small amount of blood in a test tube.
- Once they have enough blood to test, they’ll remove the needle and hold a cotton ball or gauze on the site to stop the bleeding.
- They’ll place a bandage over the site, and you’ll be finished.
The entire procedure (blood draw) for a testosterone test usually takes less than five minutes. In most cases, you should get the results of your testosterone test within two to three business days, though it could take longer.
Blood tests are a very common and essential part of medical testing. There’s very little risk to getting a testosterone blood test. You may have slight tenderness or a bruise at the site of the blood draw. This usually resolves quickly.
Care at Cleveland Clinic
Blood test reports, including testosterone test reports, usually include:
- The name of the blood test or what was measured in your blood.
- The number or measurement of your blood test result.
- The reference range (“normal” range) for that test.
- Information that indicates if your result is normal or abnormal or high or low.
Laboratories may have different reference ranges for normal testosterone levels. “Normal” ranges for testosterone also vary significantly based on your age and sex. When you get your blood test results back, there will be information that indicates what that lab’s normal ranges are.
In males, low testosterone levels could point to:
- Primary hypogonadism, which means there’s an issue with your testicles and their ability to produce testosterone. Conditions that cause primary hypogonadism could be congenital (you were born with them) or acquired (you developed them later in life).
- Secondary hypogonadism, which means there’s an issue with your pituitary gland and/or hypothalamus. Secondary hypogonadism also has congenital and acquired causes.
Advertisement
High testosterone levels could indicate a tumor in your adrenal glands or testicles.
In females, high testosterone levels could point to:
- Polycystic ovarian syndrome (PCOS).
- Congenital adrenal hyperplasia.
- Ovarian cancer.
- Adrenal tumors.
- Cushing disease (a type of Cushing syndrome).
Certain medications can cause high testosterone levels, as well, like:
Low testosterone in women can have several causes, like:
- Menopause.
- Turner syndrome.
- Ovarian insufficiency.
- Adrenal insufficiency (Addison’s disease).
- Malnutrition.
An abnormal testosterone test result doesn’t guarantee that you have a medical condition. Other factors, like certain medications and existing health conditions, can affect your test results. There could’ve also been an error in the processing of the test.
Your healthcare provider will consider your medical history and current medications when they review your results. They’ll let you know if you need further testing.
Pharmacies and various companies may sell at-home testosterone tests. But the accuracy of these tests can vary. You shouldn’t try to self-diagnose a testosterone issue.
If you’re concerned about your health or testosterone levels, it’s best to talk to a healthcare provider. They can do a physical exam and address your concerns. They may also recommend a laboratory testosterone test.
Advertisement
The only way to know your testosterone level is with a blood test. You may talk to your healthcare provider about a testosterone level test if you have symptoms of low testosterone. Not everyone with low testosterone has symptoms (like low sex drive, fertility problems or erectile dysfunction).
Seeing an abnormal test result may kick off alarm bells in your mind. But know that having an abnormal testosterone result doesn’t necessarily mean you have a serious medical condition. Many other factors can affect your results. Your healthcare provider will let you know if you need further tests. Don’t hesitate to ask your provider questions. They’re available to help you.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic’s primary care providers offer lifelong medical care. From sinus infections and high blood pressure to preventive screening, we’re here for you.
Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 09/09/2024.
Learn more about the Health Library and our editorial process.
AdvertisementAdvertisement
Ad
Rendered: Sun Oct 19 2025 04:46:34 GMT+0000 (Coordinated Universal Time)As you age, testosterone therapy might sound promising. But there are a lot of misconceptions about what the treatment can and can't do for you.
Testosterone therapy might seem like the ultimate anti-aging formula. Yet the health benefits of testosterone therapy for age-related decline in testosterone aren't clear.
Find out what's known — and not known — about testosterone therapy for normal aging.
What is testosterone?
Enlarge image
The influence of testosterone in men
Close
The influence of testosterone in men
The influence of testosterone in men
The male hormone testosterone plays an important role in the development and maintenance of typical masculine physical characteristics, such as muscle mass and strength, and growth of facial and body hair.
Testosterone is a hormone produced primarily in the testicles. Testosterone helps maintain men's:
Bone density
Fat distribution
Muscle strength and mass
Facial and body hair
Red blood cell production
Sex drive
Sperm production
What happens to testosterone levels with age?
Testosterone levels generally peak during adolescence and early adulthood. As you age, your testosterone level gradually declines — typically about 1% a year after age 30 or 40. For older men, it's important to determine if a low testosterone level is due to normal aging or if it is due to a disease (hypogonadism).
Hypogonadism hampers the ability to produce normal amounts of testosterone due to a problem with the testicles or with the pituitary gland that controls the testicles. Testosterone replacement therapy, in the form of injections, pellets, patches or gels, can improve the signs and symptoms of low testosterone in these men.
Does a naturally declining testosterone level cause the signs and symptoms of aging?
Not necessarily. Men can have many signs and symptoms as they age. Some that might occur as a result of lower testosterone levels can include:
Changes in sexual function. This might include reduced sexual desire, fewer spontaneous erections — such as during sleep — and infertility.
Physical changes. Various physical changes are possible, including increased body fat, reduced muscle bulk and strength, and decreased bone density. Swollen or tender breasts (gynecomastia) and body hair loss are possible. You might have less energy than you used to.
Emotional changes. Low testosterone can contribute to a decrease in motivation or self-confidence. You might feel sad or depressed, or have trouble concentrating or remembering things.
Some of these signs and symptoms can be caused by other factors, including medication side effects, obstructive sleep apnea, thyroid problems, diabetes and depression. It's also possible that these conditions cause low testosterone levels, so treatment might result in increase of testosterone levels.
A blood test is used to diagnose a low testosterone level.
Can testosterone therapy promote youth and vitality?
Testosterone therapy can help reverse the effects of hypogonadism, but it's unclear whether testosterone therapy would benefit older men who are otherwise healthy.
Although some men believe they feel younger and more vigorous if they take testosterone medications, there's little evidence to support the use of testosterone in otherwise healthy men. Guidelines from the American College of Physicians indicate that testosterone therapy might improve sexual function somewhat in some men, but there's little evidence that it improves other functions, such as vitality and energy.
What are the risks of testosterone therapy for normal aging?
Testosterone therapy has various risks, including:
Worsening sleep apnea — a potentially serious sleep disorder in which breathing repeatedly stops and starts.
Causing acne or other skin reactions.
Stimulating noncancerous growth of the prostate (benign prostatic hyperplasia) and growth of existing prostate cancer.
Enlarging breasts.
Limiting sperm production or causing testicles to shrink.
Stimulating too much red blood cell production, which contributes to the increased risk of forming a blood clot. A clot could break loose, travel through your bloodstream and lodge in your lungs, blocking blood flow (pulmonary embolism).
Also, some research shows that testosterone therapy can increase your risk of heart disease. More research is needed.
Should you talk to your doctor about testosterone therapy?
If you wonder whether testosterone therapy might be right for you, talk with your doctor about the risks and benefits. Your doctor will likely measure your testosterone levels at least twice before recommending testosterone therapy.
Treating normal aging with testosterone therapy is not advisable. If you don't have a medical condition that's contributing to your decline in testosterone levels, your doctor might suggest natural ways to boost testosterone, such as losing weight and increasing muscle mass through resistance exercise.
There is a problem with
information submitted for this request. Review/update the
information highlighted below and resubmit the form.
From Mayo Clinic to your inbox
Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.
Email
Address 1
ErrorEmail field is required
ErrorInclude a valid email address
Learn more about Mayo Clinic’s use of data.
We use the data you provide to deliver you the content you requested. To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, we may combine your email and website data with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, we will only use your protected health information as outlined in our Notice of Privacy Practices. You may opt out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the email.
Subscribe!
Thank you for subscribing!
You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.
Qaseem A, et al. Testosterone treatment in adult men with age-related low testosterone: A clinical guideline from the American College of Physicians. Annals of Internal Medicine. 2020; doi:10.7326/M19-0882.
AskMayoExpert. Male hypogonadism (adult). Mayo Clinic; 2020.
Gilbert K, et al. Gaps in patient knowledge about risks and benefits of testosterone replacement therapy. Urology. 2017; doi:10.1016/j.urology.2016.12.066.
Synder PJ. Approach to older men with low testosterone. https://www.uptodate.com/contents/search. Accessed Feb. 18, 2020.
What is low testosterone? Urology Care Foundation. https://www.urologyhealth.org/urologic-conditions/low-testosterone. Accessed Feb. 20, 2020.
Snyder PJ, et al. Lessons from the testosterone trials. Endocrine Reviews. 2018; doi:10.1210/er.2017-00234.Testosterone therapy fails to improve artery health in older men
By American Heart Association News
Testosterone therapy may boost hormone levels in older men, but it won't help their arteries work better, new research shows.
The study, published Monday in the American Heart Association journal Hypertension, showed men ages 50 to 70 with a larger-than-normal waist size and low-to-normal level of testosterone could boost the health and function of their arteries through a 12-week, supervised exercise training program. Adding testosterone treatments boosted the men's hormone levels but did nothing to improve artery health, the study found.
"Testosterone therapy may have some benefits, for example in increasing muscle mass in the legs," study author Daniel J. Green, a cardiovascular exercise physiology researcher at the University of Western Australia in Perth, said in a news release. "However, we didn't find any benefits in terms of artery function, which is a determinant of future cardiovascular risk."
Research has shown a link between decreased levels of testosterone and an increased risk for heart disease. As men age, testosterone levels – and physical activity – naturally decline. This causes declines in artery health and function, which raises the risk for heart problems.
An increasing number of men are turning to testosterone replacement therapy, which has seen a 12-fold increase in sales in recent decades. It often is used to treat low energy, reduced muscle mass and reduced vigor. However, previous studies have left unclear whether testosterone therapy provides heart health benefits.
"The global increase in testosterone use has been very large, particularly among middle-aged and older men who might see it as a restorative hormone to increase energy and vitality," Green said.
In the new study, 78 men were randomly placed into four treatment groups: topical testosterone therapy combined with a 12-week training program that included aerobic and strength exercises two to three times per week; testosterone therapy alone; placebo alone; or placebo combined with the exercise training.
Both exercise training and testosterone therapy individually boosted hormone levels among the men in the study, with levels highest among the two groups getting testosterone therapy. But improvements in artery health occurred only in the exercise groups.
Researchers measured artery function using a method that increases blood flow inside an artery. This assesses the inner lining and whether it can help the artery increase in size, or dilate. They found artery function improved 28% in the group that received exercise training alone; it improved just 19% in the group that received a combination of exercise training and testosterone therapy.
If you have questions or comments about this story, please email [email protected].Full Guideline: Testosterone Therapy in Men With Hypogonadism: An Endocrine Society Clinical Practice Guideline
JCEM | March 2018
Shalender Bhasin, Juan P. Brito, Glenn R. Cunningham, Frances J. Hayes, Howard N. Hodis, Alvin M. Matsumoto, Peter J. Snyder, Ronald S. Swerdloff, Frederick C. Wu, Maria A. Yialamas
- Co-sponsoring Organizations: European Society of Endocrinology.
- Endorsing Organizations: European Academy of Andrology
Differences between the 2010 and 2018 guidelines:
- More rigorous appraisal of testosterone’s efficacy and safety using RCTs published during the last three years.
- Points out continuing uncertainty about the benefits and risks of testosterone therapy as well as suboptimal testosterone prescribing practices.
- Highlights the importance of an appropriate diagnostic work up and monitoring plan.
Diagnosis and Treatment of Male Hypogonadism | ENDO 2018
Essential Points
- Recommends making a diagnosis of hypogonadism only in men with symptoms and signs consistent with testosterone (T) deficiency and unequivocally and consistently low serum T concentrations.
- Recommends the use of accurate assays for the measurement of total and free testosterone and rigorously derived reference ranges for the interpretation of testosterone levels.
- Recommend confirming the diagnosis by repeating the measurement of morning fasting total T concentrations.
- In men determined to have androgen deficiency, we recommend additional diagnostic evaluation to ascertain the cause of androgen deficiency.
- We recommend against starting T therapy in patients who are planning fertility in the near term or have any of a number of specified conditions.
Summary of Recommendations
+1.0 Diagnosis of Hypogonadism in Men
1.1 We recommend diagnosing hypogonadism in men with symptoms and signs of testosterone deficiency and unequivocally and consistently low serum total testosterone and/or free testosterone
concentrations (when indicated). (1 |ꚚꚚꚚO)
1.2 We recommend against routine screening of men in the general population for hypogonadism.
(1 |ꚚꚚOO)
1.3 In men who have hypogonadism, we recommend distinguishing between primary (testicular) and secondary (pituitary–hypothalamic) hypogonadism by measuring serum luteinizing hormone and follicle stimulating hormone concentrations. (1 |ꚚꚚꚚO)
1.4 In men with hypogonadism, we suggest further evaluation to identify the etiology of hypothalamic, pituitary, and/or testicular dysfunction. (2 |ꚚꚚOO)
+2.0 Treatment of Hypogonadism with Testosterone
2.1 We recommend testosterone therapy in hypogonadal men to induce and maintain secondary
sex characteristics and correct symptoms of testosterone deficiency. (1 |ꚚꚚꚚO)
2.2. We recommend against testosterone therapy in men planning fertility in the near term or in men with breast or prostate cancer, a palpable prostate nodule or induration, a prostate-specific antigen level >4 ng/mL, a prostate-specific antigen level >3 ng/mL combined with a high risk of prostate cancer
(without further urological evaluation), elevated hematocrit, untreated severe obstructive sleep apnea,
severe lower urinary tract symptoms, uncontrolled heart failure, myocardial infarction or stroke within
the last 6 months, or thrombophilia. (1 |ꚚꚚOO)
2.3 In hypogonadal men 55 to 69 years old, who are being considered for testosterone therapy and
have a life expectancy >10 years, we suggest discussing the potential benefits and risks of evaluating
prostate cancer risk and prostate monitoring and engaging the patient in shared decision making
regarding prostate cancer monitoring. For patients who choose monitoring, clinicians should assess
prostate cancer risk before starting testosterone treatment and 3 to 12 months after starting testosterone. (2 |ꚚOOO) In hypogonadal men being considered for testosterone therapy who are 40 to
69 years old and at increased risk of prostate cancer (e.g., African Americans and men with a first-degree
relative with diagnosed prostate cancer), we suggest discussing prostate cancer risk with the patient and
offering monitoring options. (2 |ꚚOOO)
2.4 We suggest against routinely prescribing testosterone therapy to all men 65 years or older with
low testosterone concentrations (1 |ꚚꚚOO). In men.65 years who have symptoms or conditions
suggestive of testosterone deficiency (such as low libido or unexplained anemia) and consistently
and unequivocally low morning testosterone concentrations, we suggest that clinicians offer
testosterone therapy on an individualized basis after explicit discussion of the potential risks and
benefits. (2 |ꚚꚚOO)
2.5 We suggest that clinicians consider short-term testosterone therapy in HIV-infected men with low testosterone concentrations and weight loss (when other causes of weight loss have been excluded)
to induce and maintain body weight and lean mass gain. (2 |ꚚꚚOO)
2.6 In men with type 2 diabetes mellitus who have low testosterone concentrations, we recommend
against testosterone therapy as a means of improving glycemic control. (1 |ꚚꚚOO)
+3.0 Monitoring of Testosterone Replacement Therapy
3.1 In hypogonadal men who have started testosterone therapy, we recommend evaluating the patient after treatment initiation to assess whether the patient has responded to treatment, is suffering any adverse effects, and is complying with the treatment regimen. (Ungraded Good Practice Statement)
3.2 We recommend a urological consultation for hypogonadal men receiving testosterone treatment
if during the first 12 months of testosterone treatment there is a confirmed increase in prostate specific
antigen concentration >1.4 ng/mL above baseline, a confirmed prostate-specific antigen >4.0 ng/mL, or a prostatic abnormality detected on digital rectal examination. After 1 year, prostate monitoring should conform to standard guidelines for prostate cancer screening based on the race and age of the patient. (2 |ꚚꚚOO)When comparing Enclomiphene vs TRT, both treatments offer powerful solutions for individuals looking to restore healthy testosterone levels. These therapies can help improve energy, support weight loss, and alleviate symptoms of aging like fatigue and reduced muscle mass. Enclomiphene has the potential to preserve fertility by stimulating natural testosterone production without affecting sperm count. While both have their benefits, each option comes with its own set of considerations. Learn more about Enclomiphene and discover how it may fit your treatment needs.
What Enclomiphene vs TRT Treats
What it Treats
Enclomiphene is primarily used to address various symptoms related to low testosterone and its effects. This treatment may help manage:
- Supports healthy testosterone production
- Improves energy levels and reduces fatigue
- Alleviates symptoms of low libido
- Enhances mood and mental clarity
- Promotes muscle mass retention
Testosterone Replacement Therapy (TRT) is commonly used to treat a broader range of symptoms related to testosterone deficiency. It helps manage:
- Improves energy and reduces fatigue
- Enhances mood and mental well-being
- Supports muscle growth and strength
- Addresses low libido and sexual dysfunction
- Manages symptoms of age-related testosterone decline
How it Works
Main Benefits
- Stimulates natural testosterone production in men with low testosterone
- Improves energy levels and reduces fatigue associated with testosterone deficiency
- Enhances libido and sexual function in men experiencing low testosterone
- Supports mood stabilization and reduces symptoms of depression linked to low testosterone
- Promotes muscle mass retention and prevents muscle loss due to low testosterone
- Helps preserve fertility by stimulating natural testosterone production
- Restores testosterone levels in men with clinically low testosterone
- Relieves fatigue and low energy levels caused by testosterone deficiency
- Improves sexual function, increasing libido and addressing erectile dysfunction
- Increases muscle strength and mass, combating the muscle loss due to low testosterone
- Alleviates symptoms of mood disorders, including irritability and depression
How to Use Enclomiphene and TRT
Dosing Requirements
- Method of administration: Enclomiphene is taken orally in pill form.
- Typical daily dosage and frequency: The typical dosage is 12.5 mg to 25 mg, taken once daily.
- Optimal timing: It is recommended to take Enclomiphene in the morning, with or without food.
- Common medications or supplements that safely combine: Enclomiphene can safely be combined with multivitamins, vitamin D, and omega-3 supplements.
- Method of administration: TRT is typically administered through intramuscular injections, topical gels, or patches.
- Typical daily dosage and frequency: The dosage for injections is generally 50 mg to 100 mg, administered once or twice a week, depending on individual needs.
- Optimal timing: TRT injections are usually administered in the morning, while topical gels can be applied daily, preferably in the morning.
- Common medications or supplements that safely combine: TRT can safely be combined with vitamin D, calcium, and statins for cholesterol management.
Effect Duration
- Onset Time: Enclomiphene typically begins to show effects within 2 to 4 weeks of daily use, as it stimulates the body’s natural testosterone production.
- Duration of Therapeutic Effects: The effects are cumulative, gradually increasing over several weeks as testosterone levels rise.
- Immediate or Cumulative: The benefits of Enclomiphene build up over time, with noticeable improvements often seen after 4 to 6 weeks.
- When to Expect Noticeable Results: Most patients start to experience a reduction in fatigue and an increase in libido after about 4 weeks of treatment.
- Onset Time: TRT injections or topical treatments typically begin to show effects within 24 to 48 hours, as the body receives direct testosterone supplementation.
- Duration of Therapeutic Effects: The effects are more immediate and can last for several days to a week, depending on the method of administration.
- Immediate or Cumulative: TRT has a more immediate impact on energy levels and mood, with cumulative long-term benefits, such as muscle growth, visible after a few months.
- When to Expect Noticeable Results: Many patients experience noticeable improvements in energy and mood within the first week of treatment, with full benefits realized over 3 to 6 months.
Side Effects and Safety : Enclomiphene vs TRT
Side Effects and Safety
Common Side Effects:
- Mild headache
- Hot flashes
- Nausea
Rare Side Effects:
- Mood swings
- Abdominal discomfort
Safety Summary:
Enclomiphene is generally considered safe, with most side effects being mild and temporary. Severe side effects are rare, and the risks are typically low when used as prescribed. If you experience persistent or severe side effects, such as mood swings or severe nausea, contact a healthcare provider.
Threshold for Medical Attention:
Seek medical attention if side effects worsen or persist beyond a few days or if you experience severe mood changes or abdominal pain.
Common Side Effects:
- Skin irritation (from topical applications)
- Acne
- Increased red blood cell count
Rare Side Effects:
- Breast enlargement
- Sleep apnea
- Prostate issues
Safety Summary:
TRT has a generally favorable safety profile but carries some risk of long-term side effects, especially with prolonged use. Most side effects are mild to moderate and can be managed, but monitoring is important. The risk of prostate or cardiovascular issues can increase over time with long-term use.
Threshold for Medical Attention:
Seek medical help if you experience chest pain, difficulty breathing, or signs of prostate enlargement, such as urinary issues.
Ideal Candidates for Enclomiphene vs TRT
Ideal Candidate
Enclomiphene is ideal for individuals who want to stimulate their natural testosterone production without directly supplementing testosterone.
- Men aged 18-45 with low testosterone levels who prefer to maintain their body’s natural hormone production and preserve fertility.
- Individuals with mild to moderate testosterone deficiency without underlying health issues like prostate problems.
- Patients looking for a treatment with fewer long-term side effects and those who are not comfortable with synthetic testosterone.
TRT is best suited for individuals who need direct testosterone supplementation to address severe testosterone deficiency.
- Men aged 30-60 with clinically low testosterone levels who require immediate hormone replacement.
- Individuals with significant symptoms of low testosterone such as low libido, fatigue, or muscle loss.
- Patients with conditions like hypogonadism or those who have been diagnosed with age-related testosterone decline.
Choosing the Best Testosterone Treatment: Enclomiphene vs TRT
Enclomiphene vs TRT offers distinct treatment options for testosterone deficiency. Enclomiphene’s ability to stimulate natural testosterone production makes it stand out, providing a more gradual, long-term solution without introducing synthetic hormones. While TRT offers immediate testosterone replacement, Enclomiphene’s minimal risk of long-term side effects, including preserving fertility, gives it an edge for those seeking a more natural approach. Given its suitability for younger patients with mild testosterone deficiency, Enclomiphene emerges as the preferred choice for most individuals looking for a safe and effective solution.Testosterone treatment can boost bone density and improve anemia, study finds
A year of testosterone treatment improved bone density and anemia among older men with low testosterone but also increased coronary artery plaque and had no effect on patients’ cognitive function. The findings by a team that includes University of Florida Health researchers are published today in the Journal of the American Medical Association and JAMA Internal Medicine.
The papers are the final primary results from The Testosterone Trials, a group of seven studies that assessed the effects of testosterone treatment for one year compared with a placebo in nearly 790 men age 65 and older with low testosterone. The research was conducted at UF Health, the University of Pennsylvania’s Perelman School of Medicine and 12 other medical centers.
The studies showed that the results of testosterone treatments aren’t universal for older men, said Marco Pahor, M.D., director of the UF Institute on Aging and a co-author of the papers. For example, a patient with anemia may benefit from testosterone treatment, but it might not be appropriate for someone with a history of cardiovascular issues.
“Physicians really need to weigh the benefits and risks of testosterone treatment for each patient individually,” he said.
The researchers found that the treatment improved bone density and bone strength in older men with low testosterone. Bone strength was especially improved in the spine, compared with the hip, researchers noted.
In another trial, more than half of the 126 men with anemia had clinically significant increases in red blood cell levels after getting testosterone treatment, compared with 15 percent or less among two placebo groups.
The cardiovascular trial showed more coronary artery plaque buildup among those who received the testosterone treatment than those who did not. The study found that plaque volume increased “significantly more” in the testosterone-treated group, though researchers noted that because just 170 patients were assessed for plaque buildup using a specialized heart scan, the clinical importance of the finding is uncertain. Among all 788 men in the trials, the number of adverse cardiovascular events was similar among those who received testosterone and those who got a placebo. Researchers say a larger, longer trial is needed to establish any clinical significance of testosterone treatment’s effect on plaque.
In the cognition trial, 493 men met the criteria for age-associated memory impairment. After one year of testosterone treatment, there was no significant change in spatial ability, verbal memory or visual memory when compared with a placebo group.
Pahor said he was encouraged by testosterone’s positive effect on anemia, which suggests it could be an additional treatment for the condition. He said other findings, particularly those involving bone density, need to be subjected to longer-term follow-up studies.
“The results on diverse outcomes indicated the potential trade-offs between benefits and risks of testosterone treatment in older men,” said Evan Hadley, M.D., director of the National Institute on Aging’s division of geriatrics and clinical gerontology. “However, clarifying the effects of testosterone on many major clinical outcomes such as cardiovascular events, fractures and disability will require longer, larger-scale trials. The results also illustrate that decisions about testosterone treatment need to be individualized, taking into account each patient’s balance of risks for the various conditions that testosterone could affect.”
The latest findings come a year after results from the first three of the testosterone trials, which examined sexual function, physical function and vitality, including mood and depressive symptoms, walking speed and walking distance. The researchers found that the treatment increased the blood testosterone level from moderately low to mid-normal in men ages 19-40 and improved all aspects of sexual function. Across the first three trials, adverse events including heart attack, stroke and prostate conditions were similar in men who received testosterone and those who received a placebo.
The impetus for the testosterone trials was a 2003 report by a group known then as the Institute of Medicine, which concluded there wasn’t enough evidence to support a beneficial effect of testosterone use among men with low levels of the hormone.
The trials were supported by grants from the National Institute on Aging and the National Institutes of Health. Additional support was provided by the National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute, the National Institute of Child Health and Human Development, the National Institute of Neurological Diseases and Stroke and the pharmaceutical company AbbVie.Some men develop depression, loss of sex drive, erectile dysfunction, and other physical and emotional symptoms when they reach their late 40s to early 50s.
Other symptoms common in men this age are:
- mood swings and irritability
- loss of muscle mass and reduced ability to exercise
- fat redistribution, such as developing a large belly or "man boobs" (gynaecomastia)
- a general lack of enthusiasm or energy
- difficulty sleeping (insomnia) or increased tiredness
- poor concentration and short-term memory
These symptoms can interfere with everyday life and happiness, so it's important to find the underlying cause and work out what can be done to resolve it.
Is there such a thing as a "male menopause"?
The "male menopause" (sometimes called the andropause) is an unhelpful term sometimes used in the media.
This label is misleading because it suggests the symptoms are the result of a sudden drop in testosterone in middle age, similar to what occurs in the female menopause. This is not true.
Although testosterone levels fall as men age, the decline is steady at about 1% a year from around the age of 30 to 40, and this is unlikely to cause any problems in itself.
A testosterone deficiency that develops later in life, also known as late-onset hypogonadism, can sometimes be responsible for these symptoms, but in many cases the symptoms are nothing to do with hormones.
Personal or lifestyle issues
Lifestyle factors or psychological problems can also be responsible for many of these symptoms.
For example, erectile dysfunction, low sex drive and mood swings may be the result of:
There are also physical causes of erectile dysfunction, such as smoking or heart problems, which may happen alongside any psychological cause.
Psychological problems are typically brought on by work or relationship issues, money problems or worrying about ageing parents.
A "midlife crisis" can also be responsible. This can happen when men think they have reached life's halfway stage.
Anxieties over what they have accomplished so far, either in their job or personal life, can lead to a period of depression.
Other possible causes of the "male menopause" include:
- lack of sleep
- a poor diet
- lack of exercise
- drinking too much alcohol
- smoking
- low self-esteem
Late-onset hypogonadism
In some cases, where lifestyle or psychological problems do not seem to be responsible, the symptoms of the "male menopause" may be the result of hypogonadism, where the testes produce few or no hormones.
Hypogonadism is sometimes present from birth, which can cause symptoms like delayed puberty and small testes.
Hypogonadism can also occasionally develop later in life, particularly in men who are obese or have type 2 diabetes.
This is known as late-onset hypogonadism and can cause the "male menopause" symptoms.
But this is an uncommon and specific medical condition that's not a normal part of ageing.
A diagnosis of late-onset hypogonadism can usually be made based on your symptoms and the results of blood tests used to measure your testosterone levels.
What to do
If you're experiencing any of these symptoms, see your GP. They'll ask about your work and personal life to see if your symptoms may be caused by a mental health issue, such as stress or anxiety.
If stress or anxiety are affecting you, you may benefit from medication or a talking therapy, such as cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT).
Exercise and relaxation can also help.
Read about:
Do I need hormone replacement therapy (HRT)?
Your GP may also order a blood test to measure your testosterone levels.
If the results suggest you have a testosterone deficiency, you may be referred to an endocrinologist, a specialist in hormone problems.
If the specialist confirms this diagnosis, you may be offered testosterone replacement to correct the hormone deficiency, which should relieve your symptoms.
This treatment may be given as an injection or a gel.
Page last reviewed: 13 October 2022
Next review due: 13 October 2025Understanding the fundamentals of testosterone and Testosterone Replacement Therapy
Low testosterone can impact many areas of your life, causing both physical and psychological symptoms that may significantly affect your wellbeing. Common issues include low energy, reduced muscle mass, increased body fat, decreased libido, mood disturbances such as anxiety and depression, and cognitive difficulties like brain fog and poor concentration. Testosterone Replacement Therapy (TRT) aims to reverse these negative symptoms by restoring your hormone levels to a healthy, balanced state.
However, achieving lasting benefits from TRT requires more than just hormone replacement. To experience true and sustainable improvements, it’s essential to take a holistic approach to your health. This means actively addressing key lifestyle factors such as improving your sleep quality, managing stress effectively, nourishing your body with a balanced diet, engaging in regular physical exercise, and cultivating a positive, resilient mindset.
By combining TRT with these foundational pillars of health, you empower your body and mind to respond optimally to treatment, unlocking the full potential of restored testosterone levels. The result is not just a temporary boost, but a meaningful transformation in your energy, mood, physical fitness, cognitive function, and overall quality of life.
Browse:
Browse:
Testosterone is a hormone – a chemical messenger that influences the development and function of various target organs. While traditionally known as the “male sex hormone,” its critical role in overall health has often been underestimated or overlooked by conventional medicine.
Testosterone plays a vital part in numerous aspects of your wellbeing, including:
- Mental health and cognitive function
- Energy levels
- Libido
- Sexual function and fertility
- Muscle development
- Cardiovascular health
- Bone strength
- Weight management
Unfortunately, the misuse of testosterone as a Performance Enhancing Drug has negatively affected its legitimate medical use in treating true hormone deficiencies. Fundamentally, testosterone’s primary role is to support growth and repair throughout the body, as cells continually regenerate and heal. This makes testosterone an important anabolic hormone, with far-reaching effects beyond just muscle growth.
We use the latest guidelines from the British Society for Sexual Medicine when diagnosing and treating men with low testosterone. A thorough diagnostic blood work-up is essential – not only to confirm the deficiency but also to identify potentially reversible causes and exclude any contraindications to therapy.
The primary goal of Testosterone Replacement Therapy (TRT) is to correct this deficiency. Traditionally, this involves administering testosterone monotherapy to restore testosterone levels within normal physiological ranges, supporting long-term physical and psychological health. Qualitatively, TRT aims to reverse the negative symptoms associated with low testosterone. Quantitatively, it seeks to normalise biological markers to help the body maintain homeostasis and overall wellbeing.
TRT is a medical treatment designed to bring male androgen levels back to a healthy balance for sustained physical and mental health. It should be considered a lifelong therapy and only initiated after thoroughly addressing reversible causes and improving lifestyle factors such as nutrition, exercise, and stress management that may be contributing to your condition.
Historically, testosterone replacement has focused solely on administering testosterone. However, exogenous testosterone suppresses the brain’s production of Luteinising Hormone (LH) and Follicle Stimulating Hormone (FSH), which regulate testicular function. This suppression can negatively affect fertility, testicular size, and other important roles LH plays throughout the body, including within the brain.
Human Chorionic Gonadotropin (hCG) mimics LH and helps counteract this suppression. Incorporating hCG alongside testosterone in therapy supports fertility preservation, maintains testicular size, and preserves broader physiological functions. In our clinical experience, optimal male hormone replacement therapy includes both testosterone and hCG.
Maintaining homeostasis – the body’s ability to sustain a stable internal environment despite external changes – relies on many physiological systems working together. The body naturally cycles between anabolic (building up) and catabolic (breaking down) states. Normalising testosterone levels is essential to helping the body achieve and maintain this vital balance.
Your Testosterone Replacement Therapy (TRT) protocol is carefully customised to meet your unique needs, taking into account your genetics, physiology, and how your body utilises hormones. The primary goal of TRT is to restore and maintain hormonal balance, recognising that your body requires stability to function optimally. Naturally, testosterone levels fluctuate throughout the day – known as diurnal variation – reflecting your body’s need to shift between anabolic (building) and catabolic (breaking down) states at different times. TRT aims to closely mimic this natural rhythm, supporting the ongoing physiological processes essential for your health.
We use daily injections of Testosterone Cypionate or Enanthate as our gold-standard testosterone esters. These have relatively short half-lives, which allows us to manage and adjust doses easily to minimise side effects, while still maintaining hormonal stability. For some patients, weekly Testosterone Undecanoate injections may be more appropriate and are offered based on clinical need. All testosterone therapies are combined with daily Human Chorionic Gonadotropin (hCG), a treatment we’ve found to be the most effective in stabilising male androgen levels and improving overall wellbeing.
Our preferred method of administration is subcutaneous injections, as they tend to be less painful than shallow intramuscular injections and cause less long-term tissue scarring. Subcutaneous injections also result in slower hormone absorption, which helps reduce the risk of side effects related to excess oestrogen. Some patients continue to self-administer shallow intramuscular injections, which may be suitable depending on the specific testosterone ester used and individual clinical requirements.
We firmly believe that Microdosing TRT is the future of Testosterone Replacement Therapy.
Microdosing involves administering small, carefully measured amounts of medications – in this case, testosterone and human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG) – to maintain stable hormone levels. This approach is both safe and effective. You don’t need an in-depth understanding of pharmacokinetics to appreciate why many current NHS recommendations may not be optimal. The core principle behind microdosing is to use the minimum effective dose in the most appropriate manner to achieve steady, natural male androgen levels. The goal is to closely replicate your body’s own physiological testosterone production, promoting long-term physical health and psychological wellbeing.
It’s important to recognise that all hormones are interconnected, whether through direct or indirect pathways, and the body strives to maintain a stable internal environment despite external changes. Our aim is normalisation, not achieving supraphysiological (excessively high) hormone levels, which can ultimately be harmful. Your DNA is wired for balance – it wants you to be within the normal physiological range.
Supraphysiological testosterone levels can lead to a variety of negative health consequences, including:
- Decline in mental wellbeing and mood disturbances
- Increased blood pressure and added cardiac stress
- Elevated haematocrit, which raises the risk of blood clots
- Unfavourable changes in lipid profiles
- Worsening of lower urinary tract symptoms
- Potential associations with prostate cancer risk
- Development of gynecomastia (enlargement of male breast tissue)
By embracing microdosing, we prioritise safety and efficacy, supporting your body’s natural balance and reducing the risk of adverse effects.
-
Testosterone is vital for long-term physical and mental health, supporting energy, mood, cognition, sexual function, muscle, bone, and heart health.
-
As an anabolic hormone, testosterone promotes growth, repair, and regeneration of tissues throughout the body.
-
Testosterone Replacement Therapy (TRT) aims to restore testosterone levels to a natural, healthy range, supporting overall wellbeing and hormonal balance.
-
Gold-standard TRT typically involves daily Testosterone Cypionate/Enanthate or weekly Testosterone Undecanoate injections combined with daily Human Chorionic Gonadotropin (hCG) to preserve testicular function and fertility.
-
Micro-dosing uses the minimum effective hormone doses to maintain stable, physiological levels, reducing side effects and promoting long-term safety and consistency.
Speak to our team, book online or email us with any questions that you may have.The Complete Guide to TRT for Men
Testosterone Replacement Therapy (TRT) helps treat low Testosterone, or hypogonadism, in men. It can help restore Testosterone levels and improve quality of life by relieving life-disrupting symptoms like erectile dysfunction, fat gain, fatigue, and more.
There are many different delivery systems for Testosterone therapy, the most popular of which are Testosterone injections and topical creams and gels.
This guide will cover the basics of Testosterone deficiency and TRT, including symptoms, delivery methods, optimal ranges, ancillary medications, and more.
What is Testosterone?
Testosterone is an anabolic steroid produced by the testes in men and, to a lesser extent, the ovaries in women.
In men, Testosterone is responsible for many functions, including the development of secondary sex characteristics like growth of body hair, increased muscle mass, and others. Testosterone is also responsible for developing the prostate and the testes, as well as playing an important role in male sex drive and sperm production.
Testosterone affects many factors throughout the male body, as well, including red blood cell production, fat storage, mood, and more – which is why a Testosterone deficiency can lead to symptoms that reduce quality of life.
What is a Testosterone Deficiency?
Testosterone deficiency syndrome, also called hypogonadism or Low T, is a medical condition in which the body doesn’t produce enough Testosterone.
Hypogonadism causes can include:
- Aging
- Obesity and weight gain
- Certain medications
- Metabolic disorders
- Type-2 diabetes
- Sleep apnea
- Excess estrogen production
- Excessive smoking and drinking
- Issues with the pituitary gland or hypothalamus
- Certain medical conditions
Diagnosing Testosterone deficiency is multi-factorial and requires the medical provider to assess both comprehensive lab-work and the patient’s symptoms.
What are Normal Testosterone Ranges?
LabCorp defines the normal range for Testosterone in men as: 264 ng/dL to 916 ng/dL.
Does that mean if you have a Testosterone level of 265 ng/dL, you’re in the “normal” range and can’t experience low Testosterone symptoms?
Not exactly. There are a few issues with defined ranges like this.
For one, that range is very wide, and a man who has a level of 265 ng/dL will likely not have the same experience as a man with a level of 800 ng/dL. Yet they would both be considered normal if we only use this Testosterone scale for diagnosis. In addition, every man’s optimal range is unique to him and can depend on many physiological factors.
If you only look at lab-work and a predefined normal Testosterone range, you’re missing half of the story.
That’s why it’s important to incorporate symptomology into diagnosis.
Assessing symptoms helps providers understand how Testosterone levels are actually affecting the patient, which can identify whether there’s a Testosterone deficiency – even if the patient would be considered “normal” based on this range.
There’s also a difference between “normal” and “optimal.” At Defy Medical, we want to keep you in a healthy, normal range, but we also want you to be at an optimal range for your body, which might be higher than what a primary care or non-specialty doctor would have you reach.
Based on treating roughly 15,000 patients, we’ve found that the average optimal range for men is around 800 ng/dL – 950ng/dl. However, this isn’t a hard and fast rule, and it depends how the patient is responding to Testosterone replacement therapy.
That’s why we don’t offer cookie-cutter programs – because each patient has specific needs and unique optimal ranges.
What are the Symptoms of Testosterone Deficiency?
Testosterone deficiency or hypogonadism typically creates a constellation of interrelated symptoms. These low Testosterone symptoms can include:
- Erectile dysfunction and loss of libido (sex drive)
- Decreased strength and stamina
- Reduced exercise recovery
- Fat gain and change in body composition
- Fatigue
- Mood issues and irritability
- Depression and/or anxiety
Patients may exhibit some or all of these symptoms.
Because symptoms are so varied, a useful tool for both physicians and patients is the A.D.A.M. Questionnaire. This is a clinical questionnaire that help determine whether a patient is potentially experiencing Testosterone deficiency and could benefit from Testosterone replacement therapy.
The A.D.A.M. Questionnaire
1. Do you have a decrease in libido (sex drive)?
2. Do you have a lack of energy?
3. Do you have a decrease in strength and/or endurance?
4. Have you lost height?
5. Have you noticed a decreased enjoyment of life?
6. Are you sad and/or grumpy?
7. Are your erections less strong?
8. Have you noticed a recent deterioration in your ability to play sports?
9. Are you falling asleep after dinner?
10. Has there been a recent deterioration in your work performance?
Take the ADAM Questionnaire now to see your results.
This test is not intended to replace a consultation with a healthcare professional, nor is it intended to provide specific medical advice and should not be used by itself for the diagnosis or treatment of low Testosterone. It is a starting point which should be combined with a medical consultation and a comprehensive lab panel.
Who is Most Likely to Have a Testosterone Deficiency?
Approximately 40% of men over 45 experience low Testosterone. This is often the result of natural declining Testosterone levels in aging men but can sometimes be caused by medical conditions, especially those that are accelerated by age.
However, low Testosterone does not only affect older men. Younger men can experience declining levels of Testosterone for a myriad of reasons, including hereditary or acquired conditions that affect Testosterone production.
What Lab Tests Can Detect Low Testosterone?
If symptoms are half of the picture, the other half is blood testing that shows what is happening in a patient’s body.
Different clinics and providers have different testing requirements to determine low Testosterone. At Defy Medical, we require comprehensive testing that shows us a complete picture of the patient’s health, helps us understand their Testosterone and related levels, and eliminates other potential causes for the symptoms they are experiencing.
Unfortunately, primary care doctors and non-specialized providers tend to undertest, and they may miss valuable pieces of the overall health puzzle as a result.
We’ll go through each test Defy Medical requires and why.
Testosterone, Free and Total
To diagnose a Testosterone deficiency, of course we need to test for Testosterone levels. But there is a layer of complexity to testing for Testosterone.
Testosterone moves through the body in two ways:
- Attached to sex hormone binding globulin (SHBG) and albumin proteins – this is called bound Testosterone.
- Free, or unattached to any proteins – this is called free Testosterone.
Total Testosterone testing show us the total amount of both free and bound Testosterone in the blood. Free Testosterone shows the amount of Testosterone in the blood that can actually attach to Testosterone receptors and be utilized by the body.
Sex Hormone Binding Globulin (SHBG)
Because Testosterone attaches to Sex Hormone Binding Globulin (SHBG) in the blood, it’s important to know a patient’s SHBG levels.
If we only measure total Testosterone and ignore free Testosterone and SHBG levels, we’re missing an important piece of the puzzle. A patient may have good total Testosterone levels, but may also have elevated levels of SHGB, which would limit how much of that total Testosterone can be used by the body.
Estradiol Sensitive
Estrogen is considered a female hormone, but estradiol (the most common form of estrogen) is found in lesser quantities in the male body, as well.
Healthy levels of estradiol in men can help encourage sperm production, regulate the libido and support sexual function, among other uses. However, too much estradiol can lead to negative effects including erectile dysfunction, infertility, and in severe cases gynecomastia (the development of male breast tissue).
Because men have such a low level of estradiol to begin with, we must use an Estradiol Sensitive test because it is more precise and able to closely detect estradiol levels.
DHEA-S
Dehydroepiandrosterone sulfate (DHEAS) is an androgenic hormone primarily produced by the adrenal glands. DHEA can be converted into Testosterone and androstenedione, among other functions.
A DHEA-S test can help identify whether the adrenal glands are working properly and provide a full picture of the patient’s health.
Thyroid Stimulating Hormone (TSH)
Thyroid Stimulating Hormone, or TSH, is secreted by the pituitary gland. This hormone stimulates the thyroid to release triiodothyronine (T3) and thyroxine (T4), which are important hormones that perform many functions throughout the body.
Checking TSH levels is a screening tool for potential thyroid disease. Because certain types of thyroid diseases can present similar symptoms to hypogonadism, it’s important to assess thyroid function.
If the patient is experiencing many symptoms that indicate thyroid disease, we can also recommend a more comprehensive thyroid panel that can assess T3 and T4 levels in addition to TSH levels for a more complete picture of thyroid health.
Prostate Specific Antigen (PSA)
Prostate Specific Antigen, or PSA, is produced by the prostate in men. Testing for PSA can help assess for prostate conditions like benign prostate enlargement, prostatitis, and prostate cancer development
Luteinizing Hormone (LH)
In men, this hormone is responsible for stimulating the production of Testosterone in the testes. LH also plays an important role in sperm production, which in turn plays an important role in fertility.
Because LH is produced relative to the amount of Testosterone in the blood, this measurement is another piece of the overall puzzle of Testosterone levels. Testing LH levels can also identify potential pituitary issues.
Insulin-Like Growth Factor (IGF-1)
An IGF-1 test can help evaluate pituitary function, as well as measure levels of human growth hormone (hGH).
Comprehensive Metabolic Panel (CMP)
A comprehensive metabolic panel helps provide an understanding of the overall function of the liver and kidneys, along with electrolyte and fluid balance.
Complete Blood Count Panel (CBC)
This is a commonly ordered test to assess overall blood health. A CBC panel measures the levels of many aspects of the blood, including white blood cells, platelets, hematocrit, hemoglobin, and more. This test can be used to help diagnose a wide range of disorders and conditions.
Lipid Panel
The Lipid Panel helps to evaluate the risk of heart disease and arterial plaque. This test measures for total cholesterol, HDL cholesterol, LDL cholesterol, and more. Checking these levels helps your provider understand the total picture of your health.
Types of Testosterone Replacement Therapy
Testosterone comes in many different forms. The way in which Testosterone replacement therapy is supplied to the body is called a delivery system. These delivery systems include injections, topical creams, pellet implants, and more.
Each delivery system has its own benefits, and the right one for you can depend on your hormone levels, your body’s response to TRT, and your delivery system preferences.
Testosterone Injection Therapy
Testosterone injection therapy is the most popular delivery system when it comes to TRT. One reason is that Testosterone injections allow for the most control of the dosage, with the medication absorbing directly into the blood stream. Testosterone injection therapy is also ideal for making physician-guided adjustments with ease.
Testosterone injection therapy is just like it sounds – self-administered injections performed at specific intervals throughout the week, either delivered into the fatty layer of the skin (subcutaneous) or into the muscle (intramuscular). The injection interval depends on many factors, including the patient’s individual needs as well as the type of ester used in the Testosterone injection.
Types of Testosterone Esters
An ester is a molecular chain that attaches to Testosterone. Once injected, the body must break down the ester chain, which helps create a timed release of the hormone. Some Testosterone esters you may have heard of include Testosterone propionate, Testosterone enanthate, Testosterone cypionate, or a blend of esters in one prescription.
It’s important to note that the Testosterone itself doesn’t change. The only difference is the ester, which creates varying results based on how the body metabolizes the Testosterone. For Testosterone Replacement Therapy (TRT), esters are only part of the equation – the other part is the frequency and timing of the injections.
No matter the ester, the goal is to bring Testosterone levels up to optimal ranges. For most men, this is about 2 percent to 4 percent free Testosterone (Testosterone that is unbound in the blood). Any ester can achieve this goal based on timing of the injections, but patients may perform well on specific esters depending on many factors.
For example, your provider might recommend a combination of propionate and cypionate to help you achieve a faster “spike” in your Testosterone levels, because this provides you with symptom relief and helps you feel better. Remember each treatment is individualized, and what works for one person may not work for another. That’s why it’s important to find a provider who specializes in TRT and who is dedicated to creating unique protocols to meet your specific needs.
Testosterone Cypionate
One of the most prescribed esters, Testosterone cypionate can be metabolized by the body in approximately seven to eight days, which makes it a longer-acting ester. Many patients inject Testosterone cypionate via subcutaneous (SQ) injections twice a week or more.
Testosterone Propionate
This type of ester is faster acting than cypionate and can usually peak in the blood in a matter of hours. Testosterone propionate typically metabolizes fully in three days. Because of its fast-acting nature, propionate is often combined with other testosterone esters to allow patients to inject less frequently.
A benefit to propionate is that it allows for quick and effective stabilization of Testosterone levels. Men who suffer from significant hypogonadism symptoms like erectile dysfunction may prefer propionate’s fast-acting nature. While not offered commercially, Testosterone propionate is produced by compounding pharmacies.
Testosterone Enanthate
This type of ester is slower acting than propionate, with full metabolization typically occurring in four to five days. Studies show it can even remain in the body for up to two weeks in minute amounts. Injections typically occur twice weekly with an SQ injection. Some patients found Testosterone enanthate helped them retain less water than when using Testosterone cypionate.
Testosterone Undecanoate
Testosterone undecanoate isn’t a new ester, but it was recently approved by the FDA under the brand name AVEED®. Unfortunately, AVEED® can be expensive if insurance doesn’t cover it. Even when insurance does cover it, the patient is often limited in dosage range. This sometimes leads to patients either living with under-dosing or paying out of their own pocket to close the gap.
Undecanoate is one of the longest-lasting esters, with studies showing that Testosterone levels stayed elevated for almost three months after injection. Since everyone is different, some patients may require injections more frequently, including every 30 days or so.
Because of the lack of customization with the commercial prescription, Testosterone undecanoate doesn’t work for many patients, but it is available for patients who respond best to this ester.
Common Testosterone Ester Combinations
Ester blends are common with TRT. Blends are often made up of a fast-acting ester like propionate along with longer-lasting esters like enanthate or cypionate. Whether a blend works for you depends on factors like the unique timing of your protocol, the way your body metabolizes Testosterone, and your dosage requirements. Defy Medical providers can prescribe blends as appropriate for the patient.
Grapeseed Oil Versus Cotton Seed Oil
Along with the Testosterone and the ester, Testosterone injections also include an oil. Commercial injection typically use cotton seed oil, but many patients find cotton seed oil injections uncomfortable due to the oil’s viscosity.
Compounding pharmacies offer Testosterone injections suspended grapeseed oil (GSO), which is a thinner, more easily injectable oiL. This allows for more comfortable and shallower subcutaneous injections. This is an important benefit particularly to those who may be sensitive to injections.
Subcutaneous and Intramuscular Injections
In the past, Testosterone injections could only be administered intramuscularly with large needles. Luckily, the field of hormone restoration has made many advances, and Testosterone can now be delivered via smaller, subcutaneous or intramuscular injections. This allows for more comfort with injection and the ability to inject more frequently to ensure steady hormone levels.
Subcutaneous injections deliver the injection to the fatty subcutaneous layer in the skin. The injection is then absorbed over time into the bloodstream. By contrast, intramuscular injections deliver the medication to the muscle, where it is absorbed to the bloodstream, often more quickly than with subcutaneous injections. Intramuscular injections offer quicker effects, while subcutaneous injections are typically shallower and use smaller needless, causing less injection discomfort.
Depending on your protocol, your provider can let you know which injection method is best. Your protocol may also depend on your level of comfort with self-administered injections.
Topical Testosterone Gels and Creams
Topical Testosterone application is another popular delivery system. The Testosterone is combined with a gel or cream, which you apply to the skin. The Testosterone absorbs into the skin and then into the bloodstream over time. The window for absorption usually lasts 24 hours and mimics the natural rhythm of hormone levels.
Topical Testosterone is a good option for patients who want to avoid self-administered injections. Less of the product is absorbed – usually about 10% of what’s applied – so it’s important monitor your levels to understand how you are responding to the treatment.
Typically, men require 7 mg to 10 mg of absorbed topical Testosterone per day to reach optimized levels. Everyone is different, however, and your protocol will depend on your individual needs and responses to treatment.
Topical Testosterone Options
Topical Testosterone ins available in several different forms. These include:
- Heavy cream base – this base is typically compounded to include multiple hormones and deliver them to the skin.
- Light cream base – This base can be used in a variety of ways and can also help soften the skin while delivering transdermal Testosterone.
- Gel – This gel includes alcohol and has the double benefit of absorbing well into the skin and drying quickly, which can help eliminate potential transference to family members. However, the gel can sometimes irritate or dry out the skin.
- Transdermal Patch – Commercial patch products are available, wherein the Testosterone in placed on the patch which is then placed on the skin.
Potential Drawbacks to Topical Testosterone
Topical Testosterone creams and gels can be very useful for patients who wish to avoid injections. However, there are some drawbacks. These include:
- The skin can only absorb a small fraction of the Testosterone, which means much of the hormone in your prescription goes unused.
- Because it’s applied to the skin, there is a possibility of transference to family members, especially your spouse and children. It’s important to follow safety instructions to minimize transference.
- Topical Testosterone can potentially cause irritation at the application site depending on your sensitivity to the base. It’s important to work with a TRT clinic that provides multiple base options, so you can choose a base that is less likely to irritate your skin.
Some patients find these drawbacks worthwhile to avoid self-administered injections. Testosterone replacement therapy is an individualized treatment, and you (along with your care provider) will be able to decide what is best for you based on your responses and comfort level with various delivery systems.
Testosterone Pellet Therapy
If you prefer to avoid self-administered Testosterone altogether, Testosterone Pellet Therapy may be the right option for you.
In this type of therapy, a physician implants a Testosterone pellet just under the skin – usually in the hip or the buttock. The pellet will then deliver Testosterone into the bloodstream over 3-6 months. Pellets come in several different strengths and don’t have to be removed. Once the time period ends, you simply return to the Defy Medical clinic to receive another pellet insertion.
Testosterone Pellet Therapy patients typically have around four insertion procedures a year – making it a lower maintenance Testosterone replacement option.
The Testosterone Pellet Insertion Process: Step-by-Step
- Become a patient at Defy Medical by working with our Patient Advocate team to provide the necessary comprehensive labwork, recent Physical Exam, and new patient information.
- Make an appointment at the Defy Medical clinic in Tampa, FL.
- Consult with a Defy Medical provider to go over your options and make sure Testosterone pellets are right for you. This consultation is an opportunity to any questions and voice any concerns.
- If you and your provider decide pellets are the appropriate TRT treatment, the pellet or pellets will be inserted immediately following your consultation. You may receive one pellet or multiple, depending on your hormone levels and needs as a patient. The procedure is simple and typically requires little recovery time, though there may be some bruising and soreness at the insertion site. The pellet is inserted into the fatty subcutaneous layer of the skin, usually at the hip or buttock area. The skin will be anesthetized to eliminate pain, and the whole procedure typically takes around 15 minutes.
- Attend regular follow-ups with your Defy Medical provider and receive follow-up labs to monitor your results.
- Return to the office every 3-6 months depending on your protocol for another pellet insertion procedure.
Testosterone Nasal Gel
This relatively new delivery form is a way to receive a secondary dose of Testosterone via mucosal absorption (through the mucous membranes in the nose). It is not typically recommended as a primary delivery system, since it would require everyday usage multiple times per day.
However, Testosterone nasal gel can be a useful secondary treatment that allows for a small boost in Testosterone levels. Testosterone nasal gel can also be compounded with other hormones, like oxytocin, to create an individualized treatment.
Because you apply it to the inside of your nose, Testosterone nasal gel also reduces the risk of transference, unlike other topical applications.
How to Apply
Testosterone nasal gel comes in a convenient pen-like container with a silicone tip, which allow for easy application. Simply apply to the inner lateral-side wall. Each container of Testosterone nasal gel holds about 60 doses at 5 mg per dose.
Ancillary Treatments to Testosterone Replacement Therapy
There are several ancillary medications that can be used in conjunction with TRT. These can offset or improve TRT results in many ways. Depending on your needs, you may be prescribed an aromatase inhibitor (to suppress estrogen production) or other supplemental medication.
Read on to learn more about therapies that can work with your TRT plan.
Anabolic-Androgenic Therapies
Anabolic-Androgenic therapies can have positive effects when added to a TRT protocol. While still relatively new, there has been increased interest in using Anabolic-Androgenic therapies in relation to Men’s Health. These uses include age management, reducing excess body fat, encouraging muscle growth, and improving body composition. Anabolic-Androgenic therapies are sometimes also used in an off-label capacity to assist with injury recovery.
These types of therapies include:
- Oxandrolone – This medication is typically available as a capsule from both compounding pharmacies and as a commercial prescription.
- Nandrolone – This medication is provided as a compounded self-administered injection.
- Stanozolol – This medication is a compounded topical cream typically applied to the scrotum.
You and your Defy Medical provider will discuss your unique situation, symptoms, and potential ancillary medication options to come up with a customized protocol for you.
Erectile Dysfunction Treatment
Erectile dysfunction (ED) is one of the main symptoms of hypogonadism or Low-T. While bringing Testosterone levels up to optimal ranges often alleviates ED symptoms, Defy Medical providers can recommend additional treatments if necessary. These include PDE5 inhibitors like Sildenafil, Tadalafil, and Vardenafil in various dosage forms (capsules, troches, Oral Disintegrating Tablets, etc.).
For more serious ED cases, we also offer penile injections like Trimix, Bimix, and Quadmix. These are considered the most powerful ED treatment and can often provide symptom relief when PDE5 medication fails.
We offer Platelet-Rich Plasma (PRP) injections and Shockwave Therapy at our clinic in Tampa, FL, as well. These in-office procedures can help regenerate blood vessels and encourage new cell growth. PRP injections use your own plasma and growth factors, while Shockwave Therapy delivers acoustic waves to the penis to encourage regeneration.
Compounding Pharmacies and Testosterone
Testosterone Replacement Therapy requires unique treatments based on a patient’s hormone levels, constellation of symptoms, and overall goals for the treatment. Every patient is different and requires a different protocol to reach optimal levels and experience the benefits of TRT.
Through partnerships with specialized pharmacies, Defy Medical is able to prescribe individualized Testosterone prescriptions compounded to patient-specific dosages and with combinations as appropriate. In this way, Defy Medical providers can collaborate with our pharmacy partners to offer better, more optimized TRT protocols.
Commercial products do not offer the same freedom, and they are also often prohibitively expensive. Even when traditional health insurance covers commercial products for the treatment of hypogonadism, these products typically do not offer the same level of customization as prescriptions delivered to a compounding pharmacy.
All of Defy Medical’s pharmacy partners are carefully selected to ensure the highest quality possible. Pharmacies are licensed and comply with all FDA and DEA regulations and have passed their most recent FDA inspections.
Begin Your TRT Protocol at Defy Medical
Now that you have a basic overview of Testosterone Replacement Therapy, the next step is deciding where to begin your care.
Defy Medical has been offering hormone restoration and wellness services via telemedicine for nearly a decade. Our providers are experts in the field of Men’s Health and are current on the latest Testosterone Replacement Therapy protocols and delivery systems. Defy Medical has helped over 15,000 patients lead happier, healthier lives – and we can do the same for you.
Once you become a patient at Defy Medical, you access:
- Convenient telemedicine consultations via phone or video.
- An online Patient Portal where you can easily order prescription and have them shipped to your door.
- A Patient Support team available via email, telephone or chat that can help you with any questions or concerns.
- Special patient pricing on our required comprehensive lab panel.
- A range of supplements and injectable nutrients available via the Patient Portal, which you can purchase and incorporate into your holistic wellness routine.
- A suite of health and wellness services including Primary Care, Peptide Therapy, Weight Management, Thyroid Hormone Replacement Therapy, and more. We also specialize in Women’s Health and can help male patients with wives or female partners reach optimal hormone levels – together.
Start TRT with Defy Medical
Now that you have a basic overview of Testosterone Replacement Therapy, the next step is deciding where to begin your care.
For nearly a decade, Defy Medical has been providing effective and individualized TRT via telemedicine. Our expert care team has helped over 15,000 patients lead happier, healthier lives – and they’re ready to help you.
Expert Care
Our care team specializes in Men’s Health and uses the latest research and advancements in TRT.
Convenient Telemedicine
Save time with virtual consultations with experienced HRT providers.
Individualized Care Plans
We go deeper to get to the root causes and create a protocol as unique as you are.
No Subscriptions or Contracts
You control your schedule and cost decisions, and only pay for what you need.
Extended 1-Hour Consults
Our providers listen. You can ask questions, discuss your most pressing symptoms, and more.
Access to TRT Options
Your Defy provider will discuss TRT options including injections, creams, pellets, and more.
Access to Easy Pharmacy Ordering
Conveniently order prescriptions, supplements, and supplies through our online patient portal for direct-to-door delivery.
A Variety of Health Services
We also offer ED treatments, injectable nutrition, Primary Care, and more.
Work with the Experts
It’s easy to start your care. Just provide your information, and a Patient Advocate will reach out to you.
* denotes a required field.Announcer: Medical news and research from University of Utah physicians and specialists you can use for a happier and healthier life. You're listening to The Scope.
Interviewer: If you watch any TV at all you can't escape the ads, ads for you need testosterone therapy. It looks like it's pretty easy to get, but should you get it? That's the question. Right now I've got with Dr. Tom Miller, University of Utah health care.
Dr. Tom, for a guy that's over 30 years old, it's been scientifically proven that testosterone levels start dropping at that point. Should I be ordering some of this testosterone online? I mean after all, I want to look like that guy.
Why Testosterone Treatment?
Dr. Tom: I think the question, Scot, is why do you think you need it? What's different?
Scot: So, the ads tell me my energy levels have dropped, which they have, that I start putting on more body weight, that my mood is affected, and my sex drive is decreased. Testosterone is going to cure it. It's kind of cure-all is what they're telling me.
Dr. Tom: That's a great concern. That's a concern of many men, and women, throughout the country, but the real question is are there different causes for those things you mentioned? There are many causes for people being a little overweight, feeling a little fatigued. It isn't just testosterone; it's a whole basket full of causes.
Scot: So, if I came into your office, and I gave you those symptoms, and I said that I want testosterone what would you say to me? Where would you start looking?
Dr. Tom: I would ask a few questions. One I'd ask, "What's your sex drive like? Has it dropped off? Are you interested in sex? Do you have the same drive that you had five years ago?" And if the answer to that is no and that you were concerned about it, I'd then go ahead and measure your testosterone level.
Scot: Okay.
Dr. Tom: But I'd also ask you a number of other questions. If the testosterone levels came back low, then we might do a trial of testosterone replacement, and we would then monitor how you felt. Did it make you feel better over the course of time that we try the medicine? If not, it might be wise to stop it.
Do I need a Prescription for Testosterone Treatment?
Scot: So, let's back up for a second, these ads that I'm seeing on TV, I can just order without a doctor's prescription?
Dr. Tom: No, you have to have a doctor's prescription. There's a doctor on the other end that's asking a set of questions.
Scot: So, when I make that call, there is a doctor?
Dr. Tom: There's somebody that has to write the prescription.
Scot: Got you. How do they know how much I need, because it sounds like you would do tests to find out what the actual level is? It sounds like they're just asking me some questions and if I pass they're going to write me the prescription.
Dr. Tom: That's probably true. I can't attest what other things that they do, I'm not sure that's the best way to get health care. Basically you're telling them that you need testosterone, and they're saying, "Fine. Answer these questions. Here's your prescription." I'm not sure that's the best way to try to define what your problem is. As I mentioned before, the causes of fatigue and weight gain there are multiple issues related to that not just testosterone.
Treating the Underlying Cause
Scot: So, let's pretend that I come into you because I want to be a little smarter about it. You ask me some questions; you decide to run some tests. You find I'm in the normal range, on the low end of the normal range. Would you do anything at that point?
Dr. Tom: I probably would counsel you about your lack of sexual drive. Well, I'd seek more information about that, and it might me that there are other reasons for that aside from the fact that the testosterone is in the borderline range. I suppose if you really wanted to try it we could do a trial.
Scot: Sure.
Dr. Tom: I'm not opposed to that if the patient thinks that's right, but I try to give them a realistic expectation. Also tell them that, "Look, it's not a wise thing to take medicine if we do this for several months and you find there's no difference, and you're honest with yourself about it." Just as with any medicine, in my mind, it doesn't make sense to take it if you really aren't getting a benefit from it.
What are the Benefits of Testosterone Therapy?
Scot: So, let's take a look at these ads; they promise me so many things. Let's talk about the benefits of testosterone therapy, just from a strict benefit. Why would I, as a man, even come to you and talk to you about it?
Dr. Tom: Certainly, if you had low levels, it might be affecting your sexual drive, you might have some fatigue, you might have less muscle mass then you were used to. In that instance, if you were replacing testosterone, it might help you quite a bit; you might have a great improvement. The problem though, long term, is we don't really know if the side effect . . . we don't know what the side effects are of testosterone replacement over the long haul greater than five years. We just don't know that yet.
Risks of Testosterone Therapy
Scot: So, this is kind of the risks part right now, is we don't know what the risk are.
Dr. Tom: We don't really know what long-term risks of testosterone use might be, replacement. There are a number of men that I know who have low testosterone and they don't notice any difference. So, do you replace testosterone by testing for it in men who are low? The answer is I don't think we really know. We don't have enough information. We do know that testosterone helps maintain bone integrity and strength but we're not at the point where we say screening for testosterone is a thing to do.
Should I Get Screened for Low-T?
Scot: So, it falls off as I turn 30, and as I get older. When you're testing, are you testing for the normal range for, say, a 55-year-old man, if I'm 55, or were you...?
Dr. Tom: I want to back you up a little bit; testosterone may decrease variably in men so it's not the same as menopause in women.
Scot: Okay.
Dr. Tom: So, when women enter menopause their levels of estrogen drop precipitously. The same is not uniformly true in men. Some men have lower levels of testosterone over time, but not all. So, it's unclear which men would have low testosterone and others have normal testosterone; we just don't know yet. There's not a recommendation to screen all men for testosterone levels.
Scot: So, you really can't say how much should a 50 year old man have?
Dr. Tom: Well that's correct, I mean because we don't screen.
Scot: Got you.
Dr. Tom: We don't test for testosterone as part of an annual exam in the same way that we test blood pressure or test cholesterol or test blood sugar.
Talk to Your Doctor
Scot: So, your advice is don't order the stuff on TV because you're playing with something that...?
Dr. Tom: My advice is that if you have questions about the way you feel, whether you have fatigue or decrease in energy level or a decrease in your sexual drive, then you should probably talk to your physician about that and decide if testing your testosterone level is right for you. Nothing wrong with that.
Announcer: We're your daily dose of science, conversation and medicine. This is The Scope, the University of Utah Health Science's Radio.
Lifestyle Changes That Can Increase Testosterone Levels in Older Men
Testosterone levels drop with age, but medication is not your only option. Urologist James Hotaling, MD, shares evidence-backed strategies that can help men boost their testosterone naturally.
The Connection Between Diabetes and Erectile Dysfunction
Believe it or not, erectile dysfunction can be a symptom of diabetes. In fact, half of men diagnosed with diabetes experience erectile dysfunction within 10 years of their diagnosis.
Know Your BPH Risk Factors
At some point in their lives, nearly all men will experience some degree of prostate enlargement. Understanding the risk factors can help you be proactive with your health and potentially...
Should You Worry About Swollen Testicles?
Understanding what a swollen testicle means and how to treat it can go a long way to easing the mind and fixing the problem.The Male Menopause – Are You T Deficient?
Do men go through ‘the change’?
Well, yes and no. Whilst there is no definitive cut off period when the testicles stop producing testosterone, there are very real symptoms and signs associated with having low testosterone that can have a detrimental effect on a man’s health.
There is instead a gradual decline in testosterone levels with increasing age, typically after the age of 30, that may or may not drop to unhealthy levels. Testosterone levels can be measured with a simple blood test and there are clear guidelines set out by the British Society for Sexual Medicine as to when to treat it.
So, whilst it may not be as dramatic as the female menopause, the male menopause is just as real; men often accept a decline in their physical well-being and cognitive function as a natural consequence of ageing. You shouldn’t, you should continue to have an optimal testosterone level so you can stay fit and active for longer. How many of you are taking Levothyroxine for an underactive thyroid, diabetic medications for type 2 diabetes, these are also hormones you don’t think twice about restoring to optimal levels to improve your health.
The Male Menopause or Andropause are terms frequently used in place of the medical diagnosis Late Onset Male Hypogonadism which signifies when the testicles fail to produce adequate levels of testosterone to maintain health.
What is testosterone and why is it so important?
Testosterone is the male sex-hormone, it is produced in the testes and to a lesser degree by your adrenal glands which sit above your kidneys. It is responsible for sexual maturity and reproduction, it improves libido and overall metal well-being. Remember those teenage years when your sex drive was through the roof and your brain was like a sponge, able to absorb new information with ease? That was in part due to the surge in your testosterone levels during puberty.
Testosterone also increases overall musculature and bone strength so you are able to do all those manly tasks women can’t, like open jam jars! Men are physically stronger and faster than females because of testosterone. Testosterone also decreases visceral fat levels, the type of fat that surrounds your organs that is an independent risk factor for cardiovascular disease.
On a more cellular level, optimal testosterone levels are associated with improved Insulin sensitivity lessening your risk of diabetes. Testosterone improves your lipid profile so your cardiovascular risk is reduced, it also reduces inflammatory markers and liver enzymes so your body reacts appropriately to inflammation and toxins.
Perhaps of most significance it is associated with reduced risk of mortality and improved survival. Testosterone allows men to have both quality and quantity of life. Testosterone allows men to live a healthy and active life for as long as possible, so why not ensure you have a healthy level?
What are the symptoms of low testosterone?
Are you tired all the time? Lacking energy? Trouble concentrating? Lacking drive and enthusiasm? Low sex drive? Are your erections less strong? Are you gaining weight but losing muscle? Are you physically weaker? Are you diabetic? Do you wake up in the night dripping in sweat? Is your beard and body hair less full? Have you got man boobs? Losing height?
I bet most of us can relate to at least one, if not a few of these symptoms. Well then it’s time to approach your doctor and get your testosterone level checked. Don’t just accept it as a natural consequence of aging. I use the phrase ‘use it or lose it’ a lot when it comes to physical activity. Testosterone is such an important element in keeping a man happy, healthy and active.
What can you do to maintain a healthy testosterone level?
- Eat a healthy balanced diet; rich in protein, natural fats and foods rich in vitamin A, D and zinc.
- Avoid processed foods, refined sugars and moderate alcohol intake
- Stop smoking
- Engage in regular resistance and cardiovascular exercise
- Minimise stress and endeavour to maintain a healthy sleep pattern to reduce cortisol (your stress hormone)
However, when your levels are clinically low you will most likely need Testosterone Replacement Therapy to restore your levels to help optimise form and function. The Men’s Health Clinic is committed to addressing low testosterone and increasing awareness of the issue through education and support.The Men’s Health Clinic is a globally recognised, CQC registered private medical clinic that specialises in delivering a patient-centred approach, addressing the whole person rather than just the medical condition in order to improve physical and psychological well-being.
Our mission is to deliver gold standard care in both diagnostics, using state of the art equipment, and revolutionary treatments that go above and beyond your typical medical therapies. Dr Stevens leads our highly experienced and progressive team to provide realistic expectations, and support you at every step of your journey with us. Simplification and science meet to help you achieve your goals.
The aim of Testosterone Replacement Therapy is to normalise male hormone levels for long term physical and psychological health, alongside reversal of the negative symptoms of low testosterone.
- 1Improvement in mood, energy & sense of well-being
- 2Improved sex-drive & erectile function
- 3Improved muscle mass
- 4Improved liver function & decreased inflammation
- 5Increased bone strength
- 6Increased arterial elasticity & wall thickness
- 7Improved blood pressure
- 8Improved lipid function & reduced visceral fat mass
- 9Increased insulin sensitivity & decreased insulin resistance
The Androgen Deficiency in Aging Males (ADAM) questionnaire is an internationally accredited assessment tool which is often used by doctors when making the assessment and diagnosis of Testosterone Deficiency. It consists of 10 questions that help determine if you could be suffering from low testosterone, and whether or not further testing and follow up are indicated.
Take the questionnaireTestosterone Deficiency is a diagnosis of exclusion. The decision to commence treatment should be a considered one made with your doctor, based on all the necessary information.
Email us with any blood test results you’ve recently had carried out, or contact us to arrange a blood test.
Your blood test results are reviewed by our doctor and discussed with you by email or telephone, with a plan of action specific to your needs.
If you are a candidate for treatment, you will be invited to book a new patient consultation in clinic.
Should both patient and doctor be in agreement, you will commence treatment on the day of your new patient consultation.
We strive to offer gold standard care and service that acts in the best interest of our patients. Our expert team will provide you with the necessary guidance and support to help you achieve your goals.
MBChB MRCGP Dip.FIPT
I earned my Bachelor of Medicine and Surgery (MBChB) from Sheffield Medical School in 1997. Soon after, I travelled to Australia to fulfil a lifelong…
MBChB
I began the first steps towards my career in medicine when I was awarded a scholarship to Elizabethtown College, PA, USA. With an educational background…
Medical Researcher - BSc (Hons) DPS, MSc, FRSA, MBCS, MInstLM, MRSB
I have worked at biotech companies, like Imagen Therapeutics, where I worked on the ultimate goal of helping improve the lives of cancer patients. Prior…
Speak to our team, book online or email us with any questions that you may have.
Easy and reliable access to confidential blood testing through our partnered UKAS accredited laboratory and nationwide home nurse visit network.
Get startedTestosterone optimisation gives you the foundations necessary to achieve your full potential.
Get startedTestosterone optimisation gives you the foundations necessary to achieve your full potential
Let us support you on your journey toward achieving optimal hormonal balance, stability, and long-term wellbeing.
Hormones play a vital role in your overall health – affecting everything from energy levels, mood, sleep, and cognitive function, to your physical performance and long-term disease prevention. When they’re out of balance, it can feel like you’re no longer yourself. That’s where we come in.
At The Men’s Health Clinic, we don’t just offer treatment – we offer partnership. Under the guidance and supervision of our unique team of experienced and forward-thinking doctors, every aspect of your care is handled with precision, integrity, and your best interests in mind. We take the time to listen, to understand, and to tailor every clinical decision to meet your specific needs.
Our approach goes beyond simply correcting hormone levels. It’s about restoring confidence, vitality, and quality of life. We’re here to support you with clear communication, honest expectations, and a proactive treatment plan designed for long-term success.
This is a journey – one that takes time, trust, and the right people by your side. So let us help you take that first step. Trust the process. Trust our team. And most importantly, let us help you feel like you again – strong, stable, and in control.
Browse:
Browse:
Before booking a New Patient TRT Consultation and commencing treatment under our care, you will need to have a formal diagnosis of Testosterone Deficiency.
An accurate diagnosis can only be made following a comprehensive blood test that includes a full hormone panel, as well as your more general health parameters which would highlight any potential reversible causes for your low testosterone. You would then need a second, more basic, confirmatory test four weeks later to confirm those initial results.
TRT should always be viewed as a life-long therapy, treatment will only be recommended by our doctors if you have already attempted to address any negative health and lifestyle factors, or there are no obvious reversible causes for your low testosterone.
When you first make contact with The Men’s Health Clinic, the path that you follow with us will typically start from one of three routes:
If you feel that you are suffering with the signs and symptoms of Testosterone Deficiency and are based in the UK, we can help you with organising the necessary diagnostic blood testing through our clinic. This will be followed by a complimentary telephone call with our doctor at no additional charge. During this call, they will review your initial comprehensive blood results with you and give you their professional recommendations for moving forwards.
If you have already had recent blood tests carried out demonstrating possible low testosterone and wish to be considered for treatment by our clinic – including international patients – please forward them to us by email, including a brief summary of what led you to test in the first instance. These will be reviewed by our doctor, who will personally contact you by email with their professional recommendations.
If you are already on Testosterone Replacement Therapy and wish to transfer your care to our clinic, please forward any relevant blood results you have to date – including your original diagnostic ones – to us by email. Please also include a brief summary of your current treatment. These will be reviewed by our doctor, who will personally contact you by email with their professional recommendations.
If you wish to discuss your personal situation further prior to committing to any treatment with us, you are welcome to book a 15-minute Telephone Consultation with one of our doctors, there is a fee for this service.
Your first appointment will always involve a consultation with your doctor. During this appointment your doctor will thoroughly review your bloodwork, discuss your current symptoms and conduct a thorough physical examination (clinic appointments only) before commencing treatment with you.
We will always look at your medical history and current/past medication usage which may be influencing your current state of health, and the ongoing decisions we make about your care.
Your social history is also taken into consideration, including any past drug usage, as this can often provide a useful insight into your current testosterone level. The information you give is in complete confidence so the more information you give us, the more we can potentially assist you.
Where appropriate, your doctor will go through safe preparation of your injectable medications, and gently guide you through safe and correct injection technique so that you leave your appointment with confidence, ready to embark on the next stage in your journey.
If you are attending clinic for your consultation, you will have complimentary use of our InBody 770 body composition scanner. This allows us to record and track data relating to your physical health, as well as providing you with a benchmark to work from. You will be offered repeat scanning every 12 months if you attend clinic for your routine follow up consultations. There is no additional fee for this service.
We are always happy to support you in approaching your GP to have your ongoing blood tests and medications organised under the NHS where possible. A letter requesting shared-care with your GP can be issued at the end of your consultation, or at a later date, if required.
Please allow 30 or 60 minutes for this appointment – see special instructions below.
- Appointments are available in clinic or online for all patients based in the UK.
- If you are transferring your care from another UK based private provider and are already on an established injectable testosterone protocol, you will only need a 30-minute New Patient Consultation (£160).
- Patients transferring from the NHS, or those not already established on injectable therapy with a UK based private provider, will require a full 60-minute consultation (£280).
- All international patients must attend clinic for a 60-minute New Patient Consultation (£280). This is non-negotiable as it promotes safe and effective practice.
- International patients are also required to attend clinic once every 12 months for an in-person review and to collect their medications.
UK & International Patients: When transferring your care to us, there is no need to stop the treatment you are on prior to your New Patient Consultation, we just kindly request that you take note of the following guidance:
- If you are on Sustanon, Enanthate or another short-acting ester, please omit your last dose immediately prior to your consultation.
- If you are on Testosterone Undeconate (Nebido), please time your consultation for when your next injection is due.
- If you are on a testosterone cream or gel, simply do not apply the topical treatment on the day of your consultation.
Based on the treatment option you selected during your New Patient Consultation, you will undergo a blood test either 4 or 12 weeks after starting therapy to evaluate your body’s response. Since everyone is unique and may respond differently to treatment, it’s crucial that this blood test is completed and reviewed at this stage.
We can help you arrange your blood tests through clinic, or your GP may agree to organising these for you. Once we have received your results, you will be asked to schedule a 15-minute Telephone Consultation with your doctor to review your results, discuss how therapy is going and for any adjustments to be made to your starting protocol if necessary.
You are welcome to book a Telephone Consultation between routine follow ups if you wish to discuss your current treatment plan with your doctor over the phone, rather than by email.
Please allow up to 15 minutes for this appointment.
Again, depending on which treatment option you selected at your new patient consultation, your first formal follow up will be either 11 or 24 weeks into therapy with us. After this you will be routinely reviewed every 6-12 months.
This consultation is an opportunity for your doctor to review your current protocol, discuss any health concerns that you might have and formulate an on-going action plan so that we can continue to safely and effectively prescribe your TRT.
Your next 4-6 months of medications will also be issued at this appointment.
We are firm believers in the value of human contact and a personal approach, which is at the very heart of our ethos. Therefore, we always encourage patients to attend the clinic for follow up consultations whenever possible. During your visit, any necessary monitoring blood tests can be conducted as part of your consultation, so there’s no need to arrange them in advance.
Once every 12 months, you will also have another opportunity to use our InBody 770 body composition scanner so that we can continue to track and record data relating to your on-going physical health.
Please allow up to 30 minutes for all clinic appointments.
For remote video consultations, we can assist in arranging your blood tests remotely one week prior to your appointment, or your GP may be able to organise them for you.
When booking your follow up appointment, you can choose between a 15-minute (£80) or 30-minute (£160) session. If everything is progressing well with no concerns to address, you may opt for the 15-minute appointment. However, if you have any updates or need more time, please select the 30-minute appointment.
- International patients are still required to attend clinic once every 12 months for an in-person review and to collect their medications.
If you are based in the UK and have opted for your follow up consultations to be carried out remotely, you will need to provide evidence of a recent blood pressure check prior to your appointment.
This can be arranged through your GP, pharmacy or another private provider. Alternatively, if you regularly monitor your blood pressure at home using a properly sized cuff and are confident in its correct usage, a home reading is acceptable. Please provide a clear photo of the result so it can be documented in your medical record.
Please forward the above evidence by email prior to your video consultation, as your next prescription(s) will not be issued or dispensed until your notes have been updated with this information.
These blood test options are available to all patients attending clinic for their consultations, there is no additional blood draw fee with this service.
A copy of your results will be emailed to you as soon as they are received back from the lab (usually 2-3 days later), they are then reviewed by your doctor who will contact you by email with any further action.
This comprehensive blood panel (47 health markers) encompasses all of the tests required to monitor your general state of health on an annual basis when on treatment.
In addition to a full hormone panel, this test looks at your other general health parameters to help identify any potential reversible causes of low testosterone, and give you a more complete picture of your overall health.
This advanced test also goes one step further by looking for some vitamin and mineral deficiencies, which can also have a negative impact on your testosterone levels.
Hormonal Health:
- Lutenising Hormone
- Follicle Stimulating Hormone
- Total Testosterone
- Free Testosterone
- Oestradiol
- Prolactin
- Sex Hormone Binding Globulin
Prostate:
- Total Prostate Specific Antigen
Thyroid Function:
- Thyroid Stimulating Hormone
- Free Thyroxine
- Free Tri-iodothyronine
Liver Health:
- Alanine Aminotransferase
- Alkaline Phosphatase
- Aspartate Aminotransferase
- Gamma-Glutamyltransferase
- Total Bilirubin
- Albumin
- Ferritin
Kidney Function + Urea & Electrolytes:
- Creatinine
- Estimated Glomerular Filtration Rate
- Chloride
- Sodium
- Urea
Lipids + Cholesterol Status:
- Total Cholesterol
- Low-Density Lipoprotein Cholesterol
- Non-HDL Cholesterol
- High-Density Lipoprotein Cholesterol
- Total Cholesterol : HDL Ratio
- Triglycerides
Diabetes:
- HbA1C
Full Blood Count:
- Haemoglobin
- Haematocrit
- Mean Cell Haemoglobin
- Mean Cell Haemoglobin Concentration
- Red Blood Cell Mean Cell Volume
- Red Blood Cell Count
- Basophil Count
- Eosinophil Count
- Lymphocyte Count
- Monocyte Count
- Neutrophil Count
- White Blood Cell Count
- Platelet Count
Nutritional Health:
- Vitamin D
- Zinc
- Vitamin B12 – Active
- Folate
- This does not need to be a fasted or morning sample, but you should avoid administering your TRT medications that day until after your blood test.
- Please ensure that you drink plenty of water prior to your blood test.
- For an accurate Prolactin and PSA result, you should not have an active urinary infection, ejaculated or exercised heavily in the last 48 hours; had a prostate biopsy in the last 6 weeks or had a DRE (digital rectal examination) in the last week.
This comprehensive blood panel (43 health markers) encompasses all of the tests required to monitor your general state of health on an annual basis when on treatment.
In addition to a full hormone panel, this test looks at your other general health parameters to help identify any potential reversible causes of low testosterone, and give you a more complete picture of your overall health.
Hormonal Health:
- Lutenising Hormone
- Follicle Stimulating Hormone
- Total Testosterone
- Free Testosterone
- Oestradiol
- Prolactin
- Sex Hormone Binding Globulin
Prostate:
- Total Prostate Specific Antigen
Thyroid Function:
- Thyroid Stimulating Hormone
- Free Thyroxine
- Free Tri-iodothyronine
Liver Health:
- Alanine Aminotransferase
- Alkaline Phosphatase
- Aspartate Aminotransferase
- Gamma-Glutamyltransferase
- Total Bilirubin
- Albumin
- Ferritin
Kidney Function + Urea & Electrolytes:
- Creatinine
- Estimated Glomerular Filtration Rate
- Chloride
- Sodium
- Urea
Lipids + Cholesterol Status:
- Total Cholesterol
- Low-Density Lipoprotein Cholesterol
- Non-HDL Cholesterol
- High-Density Lipoprotein Cholesterol
- Total Cholesterol : HDL Ratio
- Triglycerides
Diabetes:
- HbA1C
Full Blood Count:
- Haemoglobin
- Haematocrit
- Mean Cell Haemoglobin
- Mean Cell Haemoglobin Concentration
- Red Blood Cell Mean Cell Volume
- Red Blood Cell Count
- Basophil Count
- Eosinophil Count
- Lymphocyte Count
- Monocyte Count
- Neutrophil Count
- White Blood Cell Count
- Platelet Count
- This does not need to be a fasted or morning sample, but you should avoid administering your TRT medications that day until after your blood test.
- Please ensure that you drink plenty of water prior to your blood test.
- For an accurate Prolactin and PSA result, you should not have an active urinary infection, ejaculated or exercised heavily in the last 48 hours; had a prostate biopsy in the last 6 weeks or had a DRE (digital rectal examination) in the last week.
This blood panel includes all of the tests required for routine monitoring whilst on Testosterone Replacement Therapy, so that you and your doctor can be confident that your treatment is continuing to be prescribed safely and effectively.
Hormonal Health:
- Total Testosterone
- Free Testosterone
- Oestradiol
- Prolactin
- Sex Hormone Binding Globulin
Prostate:
- Total Prostate Specific Antigen
Liver:
- Albumin
Full Blood Count:
- Haemoglobin
- Haematocrit
- Mean Cell Haemoglobin
- Mean Cell Haemoglobin Concentration
- Red Blood Cell Mean Cell Volume
- Red Blood Cell Count
- Basophil Count
- Eosinophil Count
- Lymphocyte Count
- Monocyte Count
- Neutrophil Count
- White Blood Cell Count
- Platelet Count
- This does not need to be a fasted or morning blood test, but you should not administer your TRT medications until after your blood has been drawn.
- Please ensure that you drink plenty of water prior to your blood test.
- For an accurate Prolactin and PSA result, you should not have an active urinary infection, ejaculated or exercised heavily in the last 48 hours; had a prostate biopsy in the last 6 weeks or had a DRE (digital rectal examination) in the last week.
This blood panel identifies what physiological effect your recent protocol change has had on your male hormone levels. Your doctor will take these into consideration, alongside any current or ongoing symptoms, when considering any further changes to your treatment protocol.
Hormonal Health:
- Total Testosterone
- Free Testosterone
- Oestradiol
- Prolactin
- Sex Hormone Binding Globulin
Liver:
- Albumin
- This does not need to be a fasted or morning blood test, but you should not administer your TRT medications until after your blood has been drawn.
- Please ensure that you drink plenty of water prior to your blood test.
- For an accurate Prolactin result, you should not have ejaculated or exercised heavily in the last 48 hours.
The following tests can only be requested in addition to one of the blood test profiles listed above. They cannot be requested as stand-alone tests.
This blood test measures the amount of Prostate Specific Antigen (PSA) in your blood. PSA is a protein produced by normal cells in the prostate and also by prostate cancer cells. It is normal to have a small amount of PSA in your blood, and the amount rises slightly as you get older and your prostate gets bigger. A raised PSA level may suggest you have a problem with your prostate, but this does not necessarily mean cancer. All abnormal results should be discussed with your doctor.
- Total Prostate Specific Antigen
- For an accurate Prolactin and PSA result, you should not have an active urinary infection, ejaculated or exercised heavily in the last 48 hours; had a prostate biopsy in the last 6 weeks or had a DRE (digital rectal examination) in the last week.
Dihydrotestosterone (DHT) is one of your bioavailable male androgens. Testosterone is converted to DHT by the enzyme 5-alpha reductase which is located in the testes and prostate. DHT has effects on brain function (including libido), muscle growth and repair, and prostate health.
Please note that this test is sent to a referral lab for processing and results can take up to 10 working days to arrive.
- Dihydrotestosterone
- None
Dehydroepiandrosterone (DHEA) is a hormone produced from cholesterol by the adrenal glands, which your body converts into testosterone and oestrogen. It affects many areas of health and wellbeing. Most of the DHEA in the body exists in the blood in the sulphated form, DHEA-S, which is what this test measures.
- Dehydroepiandrosterone Sulphate
- Do not take biotin supplements for 2 days prior to this test. If you are taking prescribed biotin, you should discuss this with your doctor.
Pregnenolone is the precursor to all steroid hormones. For steroid hormone production, cholesterol converts into pregnenolone in the adrenal glands and then several enzymes complete the production of multiple hormones.
Please note that this test is sent to a referral lab for processing and results can take up to 20 working days to arrive.
- Pregnenolone
- None
Cortisol plays a role in metabolism and is the main hormone involved in stress and the fight-or-flight response. Disorders of the adrenal glands can cause the over or underproduction of stress hormones which can cause symptoms such as excessive fatigue, anxiety, insomnia and weight gain. This test measures whether your cortisol production levels are too high or too low, which could be having a negative impact on your sense of well-being.
- Serum Cortisol
- Please take your sample as soon as possible after waking, and before 10:00.
- Your result could be affected by corticosteroid medication (e.g. prednisolone). Ask your doctor whether you should stop before testing.
- Do not take biotin supplements for 2 days prior to this test. If you are taking prescribed biotin, you should discuss this with your doctor.
Speak to our team, book online or email us with any questions that you may have.The Men’s Health Clinic TRT Management Guidelines
It is vital to understand that even the best TRT protocol is not as effective as a healthy Hypo-Pituitary Gonadal (HPG) axis. In a healthy individual, there is diurnal variation of your hormonal levels, something that can’t be replicated, even with a stable TRT protocol. Have a read of The Perfect TRT Protocol. This fluctuation occurs for a reason. There are periods when your body is supposed to be predominantly catabolic, and periods when your body is supposed to be predominantly anabolic. These processes are not independent, we need to understand the need for contrast in achieving balance within the body.
If you don’t need TRT, you shouldn’t be prescribed hormone replacement therapy. There are no guarantees that your axis will restart if you ever decide to stop. TRT should be entered into ‘eyes-wide-open’. Saying that, if you actually need TRT, no one ever regrets going on therapy.
Your doctor should take a thorough history, perform a physical examination and conduct the appropriate blood investigations, +- MRI brain / USS testes before starting you on your road to recovery.
It is Important To…
Establish a Diagnosis
-
Primary Hypogonadism
Low testosterone resulting from a problem within the testes. In primary hypogonadism the Lutenising Hormone (LH) and Follicle Stimulating Hormone (FSH) is elevated as it’s trying to stimulate the testes into producing testosterone.
-
Secondary Hypogonadism
Low testosterone resulting from a problem within the hypothalamus and/or pituitary. In secondary hypogonadism, the brain isn’t able to respond to the low testosterone and so LH and FSH are low.
-
Mixed Hypogonadism
Self explanatory.
Establish a Likely Cause
Whilst you may have a high level of suspicion for the cause of your male hormone deficiency, there is little or no way to prove causation without pre and post event blood work. Symptoms are subjective.
Identify Differential Diagnosis
These may be contributing towards your symptoms, they may even be the cause of your symptoms. Not everything is related to testosterone. Addressing these may prevent you from needing TRT, they may also enable you to feel the benefits of TRT. It’s important to have a holistic approach to patient care.
Identify, Address and Correct
- Lifestyle Issues
- Nutrition
- Physical Exercise.
If you have true Testosterone Deficiency (TD), it’s unlikely that you will restore your endogenous testosterone to an optimal level. Please ensure you have made every effort to optimise your male androgen levels prior to committing to TRT. Testosterone is not a reward hormone, to appreciate the benefits of TRT you will still have to adopt the measures outlined in How to Increase Natural Testosterone Levels. Optimal health is always a work in progress.
Factors to Take into Consideration Prior to Deciding on Best Treatment Option
Age
Snowies should consider the short acting gel in case of side effects, or if you are unsure of committing yourself to lifelong injections when the gel can be effective. Consider potential dose reduction due to decreased utilisation and/or activity levels.
Body Habitus
An increase in visceral and peripheral fat distribution raises the likelihood of aromatisation of testosterone to oestrogen. Consider more frequent dosing, a lower dose, subcutaneous over intramuscular administration. Consider the use of an aromatase inhibitor under strict supervision by your prescribing clinician.
Liver Health
Liver dysfunction raises SHBG which reduces your bioavailable androgen level. This may lead to you needing a higher than typical dose to attain optimal levels. It also increases the risk of aromatisation of testosterone to oestrogen.
Sex-Hormone Binding Globulin (SHBG)
SHBG is a glycoprotein that acts as a buffer, it binds to testosterone lowering the amount of bioavailable androgens. Therefore, it is important to identify and correct a high SHBG if appropriate. Patients should be counselled that the qualitative effects of TRT may take a little longer than their counterparts. It is worth noting that TRT often decreases SHBG so caution should be applied to the convenience of long injection intervals and infrequent review.
Alcohol Consumption
Alcohol is a toxin, it increases aromatisation of testosterone to oestradiol in the liver.
Type of Hypogonadism
If you have a primary hypogonadism, HCG is unlikely to stimulate a significant rise in intratesticular testosterone production, compared to men with a secondary hypogonadism. This is worth noting when deciding on your HCG dose and frequency.
Compliance
It is important to consider which TRT will best suit your needs, goals and lifestyle. It may be necessary to have a benefit/risk discussion with your doctor to decide on which protocol would be most appropriate. This should be a joint decision as the doctor is working with your best interests at heart. Ok, not all… most. I definitely am!
Cost
There is a cost implication with each TRT option that must be taken into account before therapy is started.
Treatment Options
- Testosterone Enanthate/Cypionate + Human Chorionic Gonadotropin (HCG)
- Testosterone Enanthate/Cypionate
- Testosterone Undeconate + HCG
- Testosterone Undeconate
- Testosterone Gel + HCG
- Testosterone Gel
Administration Route
-
Intramuscular
Injection into the muscle, fast and effective absorption due to the high vascularity of muscle.
-
Subcutaneous
Injection into the area between the skin and the muscle, slower absorption potentially reducing spikes in hormonal levels as the tissue is less vascular.
-
Topical
Gel or cream applied directly onto the skin, less invasive but potential inconsistent absorption.
DIAGNOSIS
Causes of Primary Hypogonadism
-
Klinefelter Syndrome
A condition in males who have XXY sex chromosomes, rather than the usual XY.
-
Bilateral Anorchia
A rare condition in which one or both testes are absent in a phenotypically and genotypically normal male.
-
Cryptorchidism
A condition in which one or both of the testes fail to descend from the abdomen into the scrotum.
-
Bilateral Orchiectomy
A surgical procedure where both testes are removed.
-
Other Organic Aetiology
Trauma / infection to the testes.
Causes of Secondary Hypogonadism
-
Panhypopituitarism
A condition of inadequate or absent production of the anterior pituitary hormones.
-
Congenital Hypogonadotropic Hypogonadism
A rare disorder of sexual maturation characterised by gonadotropin deficiency with low sex steroid levels associated with low levels of follicle stimulating hormone and luteinising hormone.
-
Constitutional Delay of Puberty
A term describing a temporary delay in the skeletal growth and thus height of a child, with no physical abnormalities causing the delay.
-
Hypothalamic or Pituitary Tumour, Destruction or Infiltrative Disease
Such as a pituitary adenoma, traumatic brain injury, pituitary or intracranial surgery, radiation therapy, infection, haematochromatosis.
-
Androgenic Anabolic Steroid (AAS) Use
Through suppression of the hypo-pituitary gonadal (HPG) axis from exogenous synthetic testosterone use.
-
Hypothyroidism
Causes inhibition of hypothalamic and pituitary production of lutenising hormone.
-
Toxins
Medications, illicit drugs, alcohol.
HISTORY
Typical Symptoms of Low Testosterone:
- Lack of energy
- Loss of drive and determination
- ‘Brain Fog’
- Depression
- Anxiety
- Depersonalisation
- Loss of libido
Typical Signs of Low Testosterone
- Erectile dysfunction
- Loss of lean muscle mass
- Increase in visceral fat
- Decreased bone mineral density
PHYSICAL EXAMINATION
This includes a basic physical examination including blood pressure, genital examination and the dreaded prostate examination if you are over 40 years old.
INVESTIGATIONS
‘TRT Complete’ Blood Test
The test can be ordered from the Order Your Blood Test page of our website, and includes the following tests:
- Total Testosterone
The male sex-hormone. This level must be taken in context alongside the patient’s symptoms, age and other biological factors. It is NOT a particularly useful marker of actual bioavailable hormonal health. Free testosterone, oestradiol and dihydrotestosterone are the bioavailable hormones.
- Free Androgen Index / Free Testosterone
This is the bioavailable, ie. usable, androgen / testosterone level. It is often associated with the positive effects of testosterone such as libido, drive and determination. However, high free testosterone can actually cause a drop in libido and anxiety. Have a read of TRT – Chasing Numbers.
- Prolactin
An important hormone involved in immunity and sexual function. Grossly elevated levels (>500) alongside low LH and FSH raise the suspicion of a potential pituitary adenoma which requires further investigation (MRI brain).
- Oestradiol
Testosterone is metabolised in part to oestrogen, which is necessary for a healthy libido, cardiovascular and bone health. Oestrogen is the main feedback hormone to the hypothalamus and pituitary, helping to regulate the HPG axis.
- Follicle Stimulating Hormone
FSH is understood to stimulate the Sertoli cells of the testes to help maturation of sperm.
- Lutenising Hormone
LH stimulates the Leydig cells of the testes to produce testosterone. There is evidence it up-regulates some of the other steroid-hormones in the cascade down from Pregnenolone. It is also believed to bring about a qualitative improvement in symptoms of well-being as there are LH receptors in the brain.
- Full Blood Count
A raised haematocrit can cause symptoms such as lethargy and dizziness. In conjunction with an elevated blood pressure, this can increase your chances of potentially having a heart attack or stroke.
- Prostate Specific Antigen
TRT does not in itself cause prostate cancer. It makes perfect sense that healthy ratios achieved through TRT would actually be protective. Have a read of the article our Medical Researcher wrote on the topic Dispelling the Myths: Prostate Cancer & Testosterone Replacement Therapy (TRT). Your PSA should be monitored as a matter of routine, and if you are over 40, you should have an annual digital rectal examination (DRE) to assess prostate size and form.
- Urea & Electrolytes
The kidneys excrete toxins, urea and excess water from the body. Kidney dysfunction is associated with elevated blood pressure which is of particular importance when considering the potential implications or raised haematocrit. Reduced elimination of the metabolites of testosterone means that a lower dose may be necessary to achieve optimal levels.
- Liver Function Tests
The liver helps to metabolise chemicals and remove toxins from the body. Liver dysfunction can result in increased aromatisation of testosterone to oestradiol.
- Sex Hormone Binding Globulin
SHBG is the most important hormone in deciding what protocol you should be on. Whilst there is some controversy regarding the exact role of SHBG, we know it binds to testosterone to prevent it from being used. Testosterone predominantly exerts its anabolic effects when you are resting, your SHBG is lower at night so it stands to reason that it prevents excess testosterone release when you are in a catabolic state. When it comes to designing and amending your TRT protocol, it’s the first thing I look at. If it’s not being monitored, you are not being effectively monitored.
- Ferritin
- HbA1C
Healthy testosterone levels can improve insulin sensitivity thereby decreasing your risk of Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus.
- Lipids incl. Cholesterol
Supraphysiological free testosterone levels can have a negative impact on HDL-cholesterol. Cholesterol is the precursor to Pregnenolone, the ‘father’ hormone to your steroid hormones.
- Thyroid Function Tests
Hypothyroidism can mimic a number of the symptoms associated with low testosterone. It can also suppress LH production within the hypothalamus and pituitary, resulting in a secondary hypogonadism. Hyperthyroidism can be a cause of elevated SHBG, resulting in decreased androgen level bioavailability.
MRI Brain
The primary goal of this is to exclude a pituitary adenoma. It is indicated by a raised prolactin (>500), with an associated secondary hypogonadal blood picture (low LH and FSH). Any symptoms such as headaches and visual disturbance should be noted.
Ultrasound Testes
To exclude any pathology in the scrotum.
TREATMENT OPTIONS
Testosterone Enanthate/Cypionate + HCG
We consider this to be the gold standard when it comes to TRT. To understand why this is the case, you need to have an understanding of the HPG axis and what we are trying to achieve… stability. I’d say balance but that word is banned!
Put very simply:-
- Testosterone Cypinate/Enanthate to replace the testosterone
- HCG to replace the LH
Testosterone Cypionate/Enanthate are both single short-acting esters which makes dosing and managing side effects predictable. Complications, such as high oestrogen, can normally be managed by dose alteration and adjustment in the frequency of administration. If an aromatase inhibitor is deemed necessary, we use the minimum effective dose and constantly review its continued need. Oestrogen is integral for health, however, the ratio of testosterone to oestradiol is more important than the absolute number. Something discussed in detail in The Importance of Oestrogen in TRT.
HCG mimics LH. It is disappointing that HCG levels cannot be measured using the LH diagnostic blood test. Most guys note a fullness in their testes with use of HCG alongside testosterone. We use HCG alongside testosterone as we believe TRT should be Hormone Replacement Therapy. Whilst not strictly a fertility treatment, we now have over 40 successful conceptions, with two of my patients having three HCG babies!
Testosterone Enanthate/Cypionate Monotherapy
Taking all the above factors into consideration, it isn’t unreasonable for a patient to decide that he doesn’t want to use HCG in his protocol. A perfect protocol would have HCG in it, have a read of The Benefits of Using HCG with TRT. In rare instances, it causes a level of anxiety. Sometimes it isn’t feasible, whether it be due to lifestyle constraints or co-morbidities that may make stability unachievable. It should be noted that patients on TC/TE monotherapy can complain of testicular shrinkage.
Testosterone Gel + HCG
I have patients who are perfectly happy using the gel and HCG and have no intention of changing to the injections. Their numbers are great and they feel fantastic, why would they want to switch? If the aim of TRT is health and a feeling of well-being, your treatment choice is down to you and its effect on you.
Testosterone Gel
This is a perfectly reasonable choice of TRT. It is a daily application gel that can provide stable physiological levels within days. Some guys do struggle to achieve adequate levels. This is due to the unbound nature of the testosterone within the preparation which is complicated by low Sex Hormone Binding Globulin (SHBG) levels. There can also be inadequate and/or inconsistent absorption rates. Titration of dose according to effect is also a rather blunt process compared to injectable forms of testosterone. There is concern over the potential for direct skin to skin transfer. It is therefore best applied to an area that isn’t in direct contact with anybody else for up to 6 hours. Swimming or showering soon after application can reduce its effectiveness.
SIDE EFFECT MANAGEMENT
As discussed, most side effects can be managed with dose adjustment and/or alteration in the frequency and/or route of administration.
-
Oestrogen
Always a hot topic. Management of symptoms are discussed in the blogs The Importance of Oestrogen in TRT and Controlling Oestrogen Without Pharmaceutical Drugs. There is a place for use of ancillary drugs such as Exemestane, however it’s normally the lazy physician’s approach to TRT.
-
Raised Haematocrit (HCT)
TRT stimulates erythropoiesis through an increase in free testosterone and oestradiol. This can elevate haematocrit which may cause symptoms such as tiredness and dizziness. This topic is discussed in detail in TRT & Erythrocytosis – Facts and Recommendations It is important to monitor blood pressure if your HCT is elevated as this can potentially increase your risk of cardiovascular complications such as a heart attack or stroke. Most guys note a symptomatic improvement if they keep their HCT <50. It is always sensible to stay hydrated to increase the potential blood volume. If HCT rises, your prescribing doctor should look to causation, if it is due to TRT, it can normally be controlled by blood donations or therapeutic phlebotomy. Very rarely do you need to take prophylactic aspirin, I’m sure significant elevations are a sign of aggressive protocols.
-
Anxiety
Normally indicative of fluctuating hormonal levels due to being on the incorrect protocol. I see it a lot in my guys who run too high, we reduce their dose and they come back saying that not only are they calmer, their libidos have improved. Repeat after me – MORE IS NOT BETTER!
-
Acne
This is typically from DHT causing increased sebum production in your sebaceous glands, resulting in spots. It’s not normally troublesome and can be managed by topical acne medication. It can be a sign of an aggressive protocol as you always have a relative decrease in DHT compared to your other hormones, as the concentration of 5 alpha-reductase is highest in the testes.
-
Male Pattern Baldness
What can I say? Embrace the bald! If you don’t want to do that, try topical Minoxidil and Ketoconazole shampoo. I would stay away from medications such as Finasteride. Google ‘Post-Finasteride Syndrome’, that should give you an insight into some of the potential issues that can arise.
-
Obstructive Sleep Apnoea
The link between TRT and OSA is weak, but any changes in sleep quality should be noted and addressed with your doctor. Bad sleep is a killer. We are asleep for a 1/3 of our lives, if the quality of that time is poor – the time we are supposed to be resting, repairing and growing – how are we supposed to function? Continuous Positive Airway Pressure (CPAP) is the treatment, the mask sure ain’t sexy, but it may save your life.
-
Gynaecomastia
The development of breast tissue can occur despite normal oestrogen and prolactin levels. The use of Tamoxifen should be considered in these guys, with dose titrated according to effect. Unfortunately, some men have to resort to surgery to resolve the issue.
It is important to understand that whilst there are well-recognised TRT protocols freely available on the internet, it isn’t always as easy as that. There can be a big difference between a weekly dose of 125mg and 100mg. There can be a big difference in a stat weekly dose of 100mg, and that same dose split into multiple doses. In addition to the constants you put into your body, your physiology can change on TRT, which means your protocol will need to change with it. Don’t get me wrong, I don’t hear from the vast majority of my guys until it’s their six-month review, they’re so quiet I sometimes think there must be something wrong, only to be reassured at their review that everything is perfect! There is a small cohort of patients that I’m still tinkering with on a regular basis. Without exception they’ve all noted an improvement, but they’re still not quite there yet. We’re not as clever as we think we are, we need to remember to keep it simple and keep it safe.
Dr Robert Stevens MBChB MRCGP Dip.FIPTInterest in testosterone has surged in recent years, driven by a mix of medical, cultural, and commercial influences. As awareness of age-related hormone changes grows, more people—particularly men—are turning to testosterone as a potential remedy for symptoms like fatigue, low libido, and reduced muscle mass.
While testosterone therapy is FDA-approved for treating clinically diagnosed deficiencies, its use for age-related declines remains off-label. Even so, demand continues to grow, reflected in rising prescriptions and a booming market of over-the-counter supplements, wellness clinics, and online platforms promoting treatment for what’s commonly known as “low T.”
To better understand how this interest is evolving, Invigor Medical—a telehealth company focused on the wellness space—analyzed search data from Google Trends to identify patterns in public curiosity about testosterone. The analysis examines how rapidly search interest is growing, the specific questions and concerns Americans are most frequently researching, and which states are leading the surge in online interest. Additionally, the report explores how political affiliation might influence testosterone-related search behavior.
Table of Contents
How Fast Is Interest in Testosterone Growing?
Public interest in testosterone surged in the early 2010s, with Google search volume peaking in early 2013. This period aligned with a sharp rise in prescriptions and growing awareness of low testosterone among middle-aged men, fueled by direct-to-consumer advertising and the expansion of hormone clinics. A 2013 Journal of the American Medical Association study found that testosterone use in the U.S. tripled between 2001 and 2011.
Interest declined in 2014, coinciding with an FDA warning about potential cardiovascular risks linked to testosterone therapy and a mandate for updated product labeling. In the years that followed, testosterone-related searches remained largely stagnant.
That trend began to reverse around 2020. The COVID-19 pandemic sparked renewed focus on personal health, while the rapid expansion of telemedicine made hormone treatments more accessible. At the same time, health and fitness influencers on social media platforms began promoting testosterone optimization as part of broader wellness and longevity routines, further raising public interest. And in 2025, the FDA revised labeling requirements again, citing findings from the TRAVERSE trial, which found no significant increase in major cardiovascular events among men with clinically diagnosed low testosterone.
As a result, search interest climbed rapidly during this period, reaching an all-time high in June 2025—nearly double the levels seen a decade earlier.
What About Testosterone Do Americans Want to Know?
Google search data shows that Americans are seeking answers to a wide range of testosterone-related questions—especially related to symptoms, causes, and how the hormone functions in both men and women.
Over the past year, the most searched term by far was “low testosterone,” followed by related queries such as “testosterone levels,” “what is testosterone,” and “testosterone women.” Interest in how to “increase testosterone” also ranked highly, suggesting a strong public focus on diagnosis, treatment, and hormone optimization. Notably, there was considerable interest in how testosterone affects women, with terms like “testosterone women” and “testosterone in women” both appearing in the top 10.
The fastest-rising searches highlight a mix of practical health concerns and viral curiosity. Searches like “normal testosterone levels in males” (+1,450%) and “side effects of low testosterone in men” (+90%) reflect a desire for medically grounded information. At the same time, highly searched questions such as “does masturbation cause low testosterone” (+1,250%) and “do receipts lower testosterone” (+1,150%) reflect the influence of online health myths and social media speculation. One of the more unusual breakout terms—“secret testosterone nexus of evolution” (+1,150%)—likely refers to an online guide by the same name.
Together, these searches reflect a blend of medically grounded questions—such as those about hormone levels and symptoms—and more speculative or unverified claims that have gained traction through social media, podcasts, and other online wellness content.
Revitalize your health with Invigor Medical’s personalized Sermorelin therapy—secure telehealth evaluation, FDA‑registered compounding, and all-injection support delivered to your door. Enhance energy, sleep, muscle tone, and anti-aging benefits. Don’t wait—buy Sermorelin injections today for trusted, transformative wellness.
Which States Are Most Interested in Testosterone?
Despite a national uptick in interest around testosterone, search activity is not evenly distributed—it’s heavily concentrated in the South, Mountain West, and Appalachia. States like Utah, Oklahoma, Idaho, Arkansas, and Wyoming top the list for testosterone-related search interest. Others with high interest include West Virginia, Arizona, Tennessee, and Louisiana, reflecting a clear regional pattern.
Interestingly, many of these high-ranking states also lean strongly Republican. For example, each of the top five states voted at least 59% Republican in the 2024 presidential election. At the opposite end of the spectrum, states with the lowest testosterone search interest include Washington, D.C., Rhode Island, Delaware, and New York—all of which had some of the lowest Republican vote shares. In fact, the correlation between testosterone search activity and Republican voter share is strong (r = 0.74), suggesting that political leanings are intertwined with the topic.
Reignite your intimacy with Invigor Medical’s Trimix. Fast-acting, customizable injections deliver reliable performance when you need it most. Physician-prescribed, discreetly shipped, and supported by expert care. Take control of your confidence—buy trimix online today.
Testosterone Search Interest Compared to Republican Voter Share
There are several possible explanations behind this trend. In many conservative-leaning areas, there has been a renewed emphasis on traditional masculinity, strength, and vitality—values often promoted by fitness influencers, podcasters, and online wellness brands. Testosterone is frequently marketed as a tool for enhancing muscle mass, energy, libido, and overall male performance, which may resonate more in regions where these ideals are culturally reinforced. Additionally, the growth of telemedicine and direct-to-consumer health platforms has made testosterone treatments more accessible in rural and suburban markets, where healthcare options are sometimes limited and more residents seek out health information online.
Despite these regional and political differences, not a single state—including D.C.—has seen a decline in testosterone-related internet searches over the past decade. Across all states, interest in testosterone is clearly on the rise.
Below is a detailed breakdown of testosterone-related search statistics by state. For more information on how this data was collected and analyzed, see the methodology section.
Full Results
Methodology
This analysis draws on data from Google Trends, a public tool that measures the relative popularity of search terms over time and across geographic regions. Rather than reporting absolute search volumes, Google Trends assigns a normalized score between 0 and 100. A score of 100 represents the peak popularity of a term in a specific region during a selected time frame, while lower scores reflect proportionally lower levels of interest. These scores are relative to the total number of Google searches in that region, allowing for comparisons across states regardless of population size.
To identify where interest in testosterone-related topics is highest, the research team examined state-level Google search interest in the term “testosterone” over the 12-month period from July 9, 2024, to July 9, 2025. The resulting data was used to rank all 50 U.S. states by their relative search interest during this time. To highlight long-term changes in interest, the analysis also included a comparison of search interest from July 1, 2015, to July 1, 2025, measuring the 10-year change in search volume. In addition, the study identified the fastest-rising related search terms over the past year for each state.-
Though Men Go Through Hormonal Change as They Age, Most Experience No Symptoms as a Result
Though Men Go Through Hormonal Change as They Age, Most Experience No Symptoms as a Result
April 22, 2011
Dear Mayo Clinic:
Is there a male menopause?
Answer:
Menopause refers to the end of menstruation and fertility in women. It's caused by a dramatic drop in production of the female hormone estrogen by a woman's ovaries. There is no equivalent in men. So, no, men don't experience a male menopause.
However, men do experience a hormonal change as they get older. Clear evidence indicates that they gradually produce less testosterone, the primary male hormone, throughout adulthood. But, even taking this age-related decline into consideration, the testosterone level of most men stays within what is considered a normal range, and they don't experience signs or symptoms.
If a man's testosterone production drops below normal levels, for example, as the result of using medicine to turn off testosterone production for the treatment of prostate cancer, he can experience symptoms that include hot flashes (similar to hot flashes experienced by women during menopause), fatigue, trouble sleeping, difficulty concentrating and reduced sexual drive and performance. Erectile function may or may not be affected.
The underproduction of testosterone is called hypogonadism. In addition to hormonal therapy inducing this condition, hypogonadism can be inherited or result from a past injury or infection of the testicles, and also can occur with aging.
If you suspect a low testosterone level, see your doctor. In addition to the symptoms described above, the condition can cause a decrease in muscle mass and loss of bone mass (osteoporosis), similar to postmenopausal women. Some men who are diagnosed with hypogonadism can be helped with testosterone replacement therapy, which slows this loss of muscle and improves bone density.
Some people worry about the treatment's potential side effects. They think of anabolic steroid use in athletes, for example, which can cause liver problems and male infertility. But our primary concern with testosterone replacement therapy in older men is prostate growth and prostate cancer, because the prostate gland grows under the influence of testosterone. While there is not a great deal of evidence that patients who receive testosterone replacement therapy are at increased risk of prostate cancer, this possibility is an unresolved issue.
Testosterone replacement therapy can produce other unwanted side effects, however, including the development of obstructive sleep apnea and the overproduction of red blood cells in some men. Because of these risks, it's important that your doctor talks with you about your symptoms, measures your blood cell count, examines your prostate and checks your prostate-specific antigen (PSA) blood level.
In men who are not clearly underproducing testosterone — their levels still register in the normal range — no evidence indicates that supplemental testosterone therapy is helpful. Also, research does not tell us if testosterone therapy improves muscle strength, muscle mass or physical performance measurements.
Your doctor can diagnose underproduction of testosterone with a simple blood test. A sample is usually taken in the morning after fasting and, typically, is measured on more than one occasion because testosterone production can vary slightly from day to day. A diagnosis of hypogonadism is based on the presence of symptoms suggesting low testosterone, and at least two or three abnormally low testosterone blood tests.
— J. Taylor Hays, M.D., General Internal Medicine, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minn.Search Results
- Conditions & Treatments
- Adult Health Library
- Allergy and Asthma
- Arthritis and Other Rheumatic Diseases
- Bone Disorders
- Breast Health
- Cardiovascular Diseases
- Complementary and Alternative Medicine
- Dermatology
- Diabetes
- Digestive Disorders
- Endocrinology
- Environmental Medicine
- Eye Care
- Gynecological Health
- Hematology and Blood Disorders
- Home Health, Hospice, and Elder Care
- Infectious Diseases
- Kidney and Urinary System Disorders
- Liver, Biliary, and Pancreatic Disorders
- Men's Health
- Mental Health Disorders
- Nervous System Disorders
- Non-Traumatic Emergencies
- Oral Health
- Orthopaedic Surgery
- Otolaryngology
- Pathology
- Pediatrics
- Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation
- Plastic Surgery
- Pregnancy and Childbirth
- Prostate Health
- Radiology
- Respiratory Disorders
- Skin Cancer
- Spine, Shoulder, and Pelvis Disorders
- Surgical Care
- Travel Medicine
- Women's Health
- Pediatric Health Library
- Adolescent Medicine
- Allergy, Asthma, and Immunology
- Blood Disorders
- Burns
- Cardiology
- Care of the Terminally Ill
- Child and Adolescent Mental Health
- Child Having Surgery
- Craniofacial Anomalies
- Common Childhood Injuries and Poisonings
- Dental and Oral Health
- Dermatology
- Diabetes Endocrinology
- Digestive and Liver Disorders
- Ear, Nose, and Throat
- Eye Care
- Genitourinary and Kidney Disorders
- Growth and Development
- High-Risk Newborn
- High-Risk Pregnancy
- Infectious Diseases
- Medical Genetics
- Neurological Disorders
- Normal Newborn
- Oncology
- Orthopaedics
- Pregnancy
- Respiratory Disorders
- Safety and Injury Prevention
- Transplantation
- Tests and Procedures
- Prevention Guidelines
- Adult Health Library
- Health Centers
- Drugs, Herbs & Supplements
- Nutrition & General Wellness
- Your Family
- News Center
- Healthy Living
- Tools & Multimedia
Total Testosterone
Does this test have other names?
Testosterone (total), serum testosterone, free testosterone
What is this test?
This test measures the level of the hormone testosterone in your blood. Testosterone is a male sex hormone (androgen) that helps male features develop. Testosterone is made in the testes in males, the ovaries in females, and in the adrenal glands.
Testosterone causes the changes that occur in males during puberty. It helps hair, muscles, the penis, and the testes to grow. Testosterone also causes the voice to deepen. Males continue to make testosterone. In adult males, it boosts sex drive and helps the sperm mature.
In females, the ovaries make small amounts of testosterone. It helps many organs and body processes in females.
The pituitary gland in your brain controls the amount of testosterone your body makes. It does this by using other signaling hormones, such as luteinizing hormone.
Most of the testosterone in the blood attaches to two proteins. These proteins are albumin and sex hormone binding globulin. Some testosterone is not attached to proteins. This testosterone is called free testosterone. Free testosterone and albumin-bound testosterone are also referred to as bioavailable testosterone. This is the testosterone that is easily used by your body.
If your doctor thinks that you have low or high testosterone, they will first test total testosterone levels. This looks at all 3 types of testosterone. The free testosterone can help give more information when total testosterone is low.
Both males and females can have health problems because of low or high levels of testosterone. Females with high levels of testosterone may have polycystic ovary syndrome. This condition can cause:
-
Infertility.
-
Lack of menstruation.
-
Acne.
-
Obesity.
-
Blood sugar problems that can lead to type 2 diabetes.
-
Extra hair growth, especially on the face.
Testosterone levels in males drop as they age. This is not considered to be hypogonadism. The U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) currently advises against treating males with low testosterone caused only by aging.
Why do you need this test?
You may need this test if you have symptoms of low testosterone.
Symptoms of low testosterone in males include:
-
Large breasts.
-
Low sex drive or lack of interest in sex.
-
Trouble getting an erection.
-
Low sperm count and other fertility problems.
-
Changes in the testicles.
-
Weak bones.
-
Irritability.
-
Trouble concentrating.
-
Loss of muscle mass.
-
Hair loss.
-
Depression.
-
Fatigue.
-
Anemia.
Symptoms of low testosterone in females include:
-
Fertility problems.
-
Missed or irregular menstrual periods.
-
Osteoporosis.
-
Low sex drive.
-
Changes in breast tissue.
-
Vaginal dryness.
What other tests might you have along with this test?
You may also have other blood tests to check hormone levels. These include:
-
Follicle-stimulating hormone test.
-
Luteinizing hormone test.
-
Thyroid stimulating hormone test.
-
Prolactin test.
You may also need to have:
-
Biopsy of the testicles.
-
Imaging test, such as an MRI scan of the pituitary.
-
Semen analysis.
-
Central hormones (tests of the pituitary gland).
What do your test results mean?
Test results may vary depending on your age, sex, health history, and other things. Your test results may be different depending on the lab used. Ask your doctor what your test results mean for you.
The results of this test are given in nanograms per deciliter (ng/dL). Normal test results show total testosterone levels of:
-
270 to 1,070 ng/dL for males (depending on age).
-
15 to 70 ng/dL for females.
If your testosterone levels are higher or lower than normal, you may have a condition that affects your testosterone production. If your levels are higher than normal, you may have a tumor on the testes or ovaries.
How is this test done?
The test is done with a blood sample. A needle is used to draw blood from a vein in your arm or hand. This test is usually done in the morning. This is because testosterone levels tend to be highest at that time. But you may need to have this test more than once, and at different times of the day, to confirm low testosterone levels. This is because your testosterone level can change from morning to evening and from day to day.
Does this test pose any risks?
Having a blood test with a needle carries some risks. These include bleeding, infection, bruising, and feeling lightheaded. When the needle pricks your arm or hand, you may feel a slight sting or pain. Afterward, the site may be sore.
What might affect your test results?
Some medicines may affect your test results. These include hormone medicines and antifungal medicines, such as ketoconazole. Some foods that have phytoestrogen can also affect testosterone levels. These include some fruits and vegetables, wine, and tea. Having the test done late in the day may show that your testosterone level is lower than it really is.
How do you get ready for this test?
You don't need to prepare for this test. But be sure your doctor knows about all medicines, herbs, vitamins, and supplements you are taking. This includes medicines that don't need a prescription and any illegal drugs you may use.
Online Medical Reviewer: Rita Sather RN
Online Medical Reviewer: Robyn Zercher FNPTour of Testosterone [Infographic]
What to Know About the Hormone
Published November 2021
You might not have learned about testosterone since sex education, if at all. Do you know how it affects the body? Are you aware of common myths about it? Do you know how to get your testosterone levels tested?
Northwestern Medicine Urologist Nelson E. Bennett Jr, MD, has expertise in men's health, erectile dysfunction, testosterone replacement therapy and other related areas. Below he guides you through a tour of testosterone. Here is what you need to know about this hormone.TRT – Making Men Happy, Healthy & Horny! Sorry Ladies!
Maybe not the most professional strapline but it’s pretty accurate! Is Testosterone Replacement Therapy the miracle drug all men have been seeking, or is it all too good to be true?
“The results have been truly spectacular! Within 3 months I have more energy, a more positive outlook and a high sex drive. I have started working out at the gym like I used to when younger, I feel terrific and have my life back.”
There’s no doubt about it, having an optimal testosterone makes you feel great. Most of my patients come back at their 3 month review with a renewed enthusiasm for life. Energy levels have increased, libido has increased and the mental fog has lifted. It’s almost like a eureka moment, it’s a pleasure to witness.
I’ve found my niche, I’ve found my raison d’etre. I believe I’ve served my time within the NHS. As a junior doctor I’ve worked 36 hours straight, I’ve gone to work early and left late more times than I care to remember, I’ve worked enough weekends, enough evenings, enough nights, enough bank holidays. I’ve spoken about this before, we now live in a society of ‘entitled takers’, a society where ‘want’ is mistaken for ‘need’.
I look forward to going to work now. My guys are more often than not, well informed, well-motivated and appreciative of the work we do here at The Men’s Health Clinic. Their concerns regarding symptoms of low testosterone have often fallen on deaf ears, be it from their GP or even their Endocrinologist. You can see the relief on their faces that someone will finally listen to their concerns and take them seriously.
Testosterone Replacement Therapy is great! I’m not just saying that, take a look at the testimonial section on the website to see what my guys think of it. It’s not just a subjective qualitative improvement either, TRT improves physical health.
We’ve had this discussion before, there is a natural order to life. From a biological standpoint, you are supposed to grow up, achieve sexual maturity, father children and stay healthy long enough for your children to procreate. The circle of life. It might seem like a strange concept, but you’re not supposed to be healthy when you are old! You are supposed to make way for the next generation.
Do you need to accept the overall decline in your health as a natural consequence of aging, or should you do something about it? Is defying the natural order by using Testosterone Replacement Therapy to restore health and vitality therefore ethically correct? Do I really need to answer that? In fact, I won’t even dignify the question with a proper response.
Having a healthy testosterone is pivotal to men’s health. We already know levels drop with age and we’ve discussed the biological rationale behind this. However, there are numerous reasons why levels can prematurely drop and why restoring levels is advantageous to both psychological and physical health.
Hopefully you now understand the rationale behind using Testosterone Replacement Therapy. We use bioidentical hormones to restore health. The biochemical structure of these hormones is identical to that produced by the body, it is as ‘natural’ as can be. That being said, the different esters have different half-lives, the delivery mechanism to the target cells isn’t the same as that of the pathophysiological mechanism of your body. As we’ve discussed before, the hypothalamic–pituitary–gonadal axis (HPG axis) is a delicate negative feedback system that responds to the body’s need for optimal testosterone within the body at the appropriate time. There is diurnal variation in testosterone levels throughout the day.
Testosterone is an anabolic hormone, it best exerts its effects during periods of rest to help facilitate recovery and growth. TRT cannot mirror normal physiological levels and it does not respond to the same cues that occur naturally in your body, but does that really matter? All treatments carry potential risk alongside potential benefit, it’s important to consider these so that you can make a balanced, informed decision about what is best for you.
Potential side effects:-
- Polycythaemia (Increased Concentration of Red Blood Cells) – Testosterone is anabolic, it causes an increase in erythropoiesis within the bone marrow. This can increase the concentration of red blood cells within the plasma. You can look at this as a positive and also a negative. Athletes expose themselves to altitude training for this exact same purpose, more red blood cells means more cells potentially carrying oxygen to the tissues. The downside of this is that too many essentially increases the viscosity of the blood. The slower the blood passes through the blood vessel, the increased chance of a blockage or a clot forming. This tends to be more common with sudden spikes in testosterone levels and less common if there is a steady testosterone level. Symptoms of polycythaemia include headache, weakness, shortness of breath & dizziness. Potential serious complications include strokes and heart attacks. We have a number of guys who have a haemoglobin and haematocrit on the higher end of normal. The simple solution to this is regular blood donation or venesection, with regular blood tests to ensure levels stay within safe parameters.
- Azoospermia (Reduced Fertility) – Exogenous application of testosterone interferes with the hypothalamic–pituitary–gonadal axis (HPG axis), which is a negative feedback system. It essentially tells the hypothalamus that your body has enough testosterone and not to release Follicle Stimulating Hormone (FSH) & Lutenising Hormone (LH) from the pituitary gland. FSH is the primary hormone for stimulating the testes to produce sperm, however LH, whose primary role is testosterone production, appears to also be involved in spermatogenesis. This can decrease sperm production which would obviously affect fertility. A hormone called Human Chorionic Gonadotrophin (HCG), which is produced by the placenta in pregnant females, has been found to mimic LH and has been used to help preserve fertility in men receiving TRT.
- Oestrogen Excess – Oestrogen is produced as a bi-product of testosterone metabolism. Oestrogen in men is needed for bone density, skin health, cognitive function, healthy lipid profile, libido and hair health. It is common to have a low oestrogen with low testosterone, and conversely a high oestrogen with high testosterone. Excess oestrogen can cause gynaecomastia, commonly referred to as ‘man boobs’ or ‘bitch tits’. Other symptoms include softer erections and water retention with night sweats. Again, having a steady state testosterone minimises the risk of oestrogen excess, and it appears to be the testosterone to oestrodiol ratio that is more important than simply an excess of oestrogen. Some people are more prone to side effects than others and it may be worth considering a different ester or regime if you experience these side effects. There is a drug called Anastrozole, a drug traditionally used in treating females with breast cancer, that can be used to prevent aromatisation of testosterone to its metabolites. Long term use has been associated with increased insulin resistance, therefore its use should ideally be as a temporary measure until a more suitable treatment plan is established.
- Dihydrotestosterone Excess – DHT is another bi-product of testosterone metabolism, it is essential for development of your secondary sexual characteristics. One side effect of excess DHT is acne as it also increases sebum production within the sebaceous glands of the skin. There are many ways of managing acne, such as zinc supplementation, anti-acne creams and sunlight exposure. Some patients on TRT have historically used Roaccutane to treat their acne, however this is extreme in my opinion as it is a rather toxic drug. It is better to consider a reduction in testosterone dose, rather than adding in an artificial, potentially toxic drug! An excess of DHT can also worsen male pattern baldness in those who are susceptible. Treatments include Minoxidil foam and ketoconazole shampoo. I’m not an advocate of medications such as Propecia (Finasteride) which prevent the conversion of testosterone to DHT, as they often have troublesome side effects such as sexual dysfunction. Much better to accept one’s fate and shave it off in my opinion!
“Grow beard = 10% increase in squat. Shave head = 10% increase in squat. Do both = 25% increase.”
- Testicular Shrinkage – Administration of exogenous testosterone essentially tells the body to stop producing FSH & LH. The testes effectively become redundant and shrink! Use of HCG can help minimise this. Whilst it might only seem an aesthetic concern, HCG is also used to preserve testicular function, which includes sperm production and increased libido through androgen production. Whilst not essential, it makes no sense shutting off testicular function from a pathophysiological perspective. I would always recommend HCG as part of your TRT protocol, whatever TRT option you finally decide on.
Side effects tend to be transitory until we establish what type of treatment and what regime is best for you. It isn’t a one size fits all scenario, there are pros and cons to each treatment modality. It is very rare for a patient to come into clinic and want to change treatments. So rest assured, whatever treatment you choose, you will be happy with the outcome, even if there is a little tinkering involved into establishing what is the best treatment option for you.
We all have the right to be ‘Happy, healthy & horny!’
Dr. Robert D Stevens MBChB MRCGP Dip.FIPTTRT is one of the most talked-about treatments for men today. It’s often seen as the answer to low libido, fatigue, and mood swings. But how much do you really know about it? This article walks you through the benefits and risks of TRT so you can make an informed decision.
Overview of Testosterone Replacement Therapy
Testosterone Replacement Therapy (TRT), alternatively called as androgen replacement therapy, is a medical treatment that increases testosterone levels in men suffering from insufficient testosterone. This condition is called hypogonadism, where the body is no longer producing enough testosterone on its own. It may stem from issues in the testicles or problems in the brain regions responsible for directing hormones.
Testosterone naturally declines with age. From around 30 years old, men typically experience a 1% drop in testosterone each year. While that sounds small, it builds up over time. Low testosterone, or “low T,” can also occur earlier due to injury, illness, or other underlying issues. Signs and symptoms of low T include:
- Reduced sex drive
- Erectile dysfunction
- Fatigue or low energy
- Depression or mood swings
- Poor concentration or memory
- Loss of muscle mass
- Increased body fat
- Excessive hair loss
- Low semen volume
- Infertility
A diagnosis of hypogonadism is made when a man’s blood testosterone level falls below 250 to 300 ng/dL (depending on the country and its reference range). Low testosterone can cause all sorts of male sexual dysfunction. It affects libido, erection quality, and semen production. Even if the cause is partly psychological or vascular, addressing low T is a key step in restoring sexual health.
Types of Testosterone Replacement Therapy
There’s no one-size-fits-all approach to testosterone replacement. Here are the modes of TRT that you can try:
Topical Testosterone
Topical testosterone can be either a gel or a skin patch that’s used daily. Gels are absorbed through clean skin. It’s usually applied on the upper arms, shoulders, or thighs. Patches stick to various parts of the body and are rotated to avoid skin irritation. These options are convenient but may transfer testosterone to others through close skin contact.
Testosterone Injections
Testosterone injections are given either into a muscle or under the skin. They can be short-acting (every 1 to 2 weeks) or long-acting (every 10 weeks). This method is affordable and delivers strong results but may cause hormone level spikes or dips between doses. Some prefer doing the injections at home while others go to a clinic.
Testosterone Implants
Implants are tiny pellets that doctors insert under your skin. They release testosterone slowly over 3 to 6 months and require a minor outpatient procedure. Many choose implants for their consistency and convenience. However, the insertion site may feel sore or bruised after the procedure.
Buccal Testosterone
This type is a small and sticky tablet placed on your upper gum twice a day. It releases testosterone steadily into your bloodstream through the oral tissues. Buccal tablets are needle-free and discreet. However, they can cause gum irritation or headaches. It’s best to switch sides with each use to reduce discomfort.
Intranasal Testosterone
This form is a gel you apply inside each nostril three times daily. It’s absorbed quickly and avoids skin contact risks. Some find it useful for maintaining stable levels throughout the day. Side effects may include nasal irritation, headaches, or nosebleeds.
Testosterone Pills
These are swallowed with water. Oral testosterone is often consumed twice a day with meals. Newer pills avoid liver strain by absorbing through the lymphatic system, not the liver. They’re convenient but can be costly and are less commonly prescribed. Some users report higher blood pressure so monitoring is key.
Advantages of Testosterone Replacement Therapy
We know that TRT is used to treat low testosterone. But what other benefits does it offer to your overall health? Here’s how TRT makes a real difference for men who need it:
- Stronger Erections – low testosterone can inhibit blood flow to your penis which can trigger erectile dysfunction. In response to this, TRT improves circulation and sexual response. This helps men not only regain confidence in the bed but also have real satisfaction when having physical intimacy.
- Improved Sperm Count – in certain cases, medically managed TRT can support sperm production by regulating hormonal signals. This can be especially important for men who are trying to conceive.
- Enhanced Energy Levels – testosterone plays a major role in the metabolism of energy and the creation of red blood cells. With TRT, men often feel less fatigued and more motivated to engage in daily activities including physical intimacy.
- Increased Bone Density & Muscle Mass – Testosterone helps maintain strong bones and supports lean muscle growth. TRT can prevent accidental fractures (due to weakened bones) while making it easier to stay active and sexually fit.
- Raised Insulin Sensitivity – low testosterone is linked to insulin resistance and metabolic issues. TRT can help regulate blood sugar which helps reduce inflammation that may affect sexual function. Since diabetes can trigger erectile dysfunction, TRT may support erectile function for diabetic men.
- Stable mood – hormonal imbalances can lead to irritability, low self-esteem, and even anxiety which contribute to erectile dysfunction. TRT helps regulate mood and reduce emotional lows. This often leads to better communication and intimacy with partners.
Side Effects of Testosterone Replacement Therapy
Like any medical treatment, TRT comes with potential risks. If you notice any of the side effects below, talk to your doctor immediately. Note that many of these happen in men with preexisting conditions that don’t align well with TRT or in men who start treatment without actually having low testosterone:
- Smaller testicles – testosterone therapy can reduce the body’s own testosterone production leading to testicular shrinkage. This is a common side effect when external hormones override natural function.
- Prostate enlargement – TRT can stimulate the prostate gland causing it to grow. This may lead to difficulty urinating or a weaker stream.
- Breast enlargement – excess testosterone may be converted to ‘female’ hormones. This causes the breast tissue to swell. This can be distressing and may also affect body image and sexual confidence.
- Lower sperm count – TRT can disrupt the hormonal signals that control sperm production which can, in turn, result in infertility. This is especially important for men who plan to have children in the future.
- Priapism – this painful and dangerous sexual condition happens when you stay erect for too long (lasting beyond four hours). While rare, if you suspect you’re having priapism, you should get urgent or emergency medical care to prevent long-term damage.
- Baldness or excessive hair – testosterone may trigger hair loss on the scalp or increase body hair growth (depending on your genetic sensitivity to hormones). This doesn’t directly affect sexual function but can impact confidence.
- Acne – hormonal changes from TRT can stimulate oil glands. Oily skin or face can trigger acne flare-ups. This is more likely in men already prone to oily skin.
- Swollen ankles – TRT can cause fluid retention (especially in the lower legs and ankles). If unaddressed, this might lead to discomfort or affect mobility.
- Urinary abnormalities – an enlarged prostate or hormonal changes may cause more frequent urination, urgency, or difficulty emptying the bladder. This can interrupt sleep and reduce overall quality of life.
- Skin rashes or itching – these occur in men using topical testosterone gels or creams. It can often be managed by switching application sites or the mode of TRT you’re using.
- Increase in blood clots – TRT can raise red blood cell count. This increases the risk of deep vein thrombosis or pulmonary embolism. These are serious complications that require urgent care.
- Cardiovascular issues – for men without low testosterone, TRT may raise blood pressure and strain the heart. This increases your risk of experiencing heart attacks and strokes (especially in those with underlying heart problems). Cardiovascular diseases are the most common physiological contributor to erectile dysfunction.
- Worsening of sleep apnoea – testosterone can affect breathing regulation during sleep. Men with this condition may find their symptoms become more severe.
- Worsening of prostate cancer – TRT can stimulate the growth of prostate cancer cells. This is why screening is critical before starting treatment.
- Mood swings – testosterone affects brain chemistry and mood regulation. It may increase irritability, anxiety, or sudden emotional changes. This can lead to strained relationships that affect sexual connection.
This means a man shouldn’t be on TRT if he has prostate/breast cancer, benign prostatic hyperplasia (enlarged prostate), cardiovascular diseases, sleep apnea, blood clot issues, elevated red blood cells, and plans to have biological children (no prior fertility issues).
TRT vs Anabolic Steroids
Anabolic steroids are manmade chemicals that imitate natural testosterone. Men often take it in unhealthy doses to build muscle and boost performance. Unlike TRT, which uses carefully regulated amounts to restore natural hormone levels in men with hypogonadism, anabolic steroids flood the body with too much synthetic testosterone. These excessive doses are linked to serious health risks like aggression, liver damage, heart issues, and mood disorders. Meanwhile, TRT is medically supervised and generally safe for men without conditions like prostate cancer or heart failure. Still, long-term studies on TRT have mixed results which is why it’s important to assess your personal risks before starting treatment.
Conclusion
TRT isn’t a magic fix. However, it can be life changing for men struggling with low T. So, if you’re feeling constantly tired, losing muscle, or just not feeling like yourself anymore, it might be time to get checked. Our clinic has helped thousands of men like you regain their sex drive and confidence. Book an appointment with us to get access to our multidisciplinary treatment for a full rehabilitation of your sexual health!How to get TRT in the UK?
In order to obtain TRT via either the NHS or privately your total testosterone must be less than 15 nmol/L. You must have a medical need for treatment and have ruled out various other life-style factors such as poor sleep, obesity, stress and exercise.
It’s true that only a licensed doctor can issue prescriptions for TRT in the UK, it’s not something you can legally obtain yourself without a doctor prescription.
To start medicated TRT in the UK such as an injection or gel you will usually need two blood tests to validate your testosterone levels are consistently low, often taken a month apart to be 100% sure you have low testosterone.
There are two ways to get TRT in the UK:
- On the NHS, which is challenging and complicated to obtain.
- Private TRT clinics, an example being Balance My Hormones.
Can I get TRT on the NHS?
Yes you can get TRT on the NHS, however obtaining it can be time consuming and if on the rare chance you are offered TRT they tend to only prescribe a limited choice of medications. When it comes to the NHS they will often only consider prescribing TRT with testosterone levels of 8 nmol/L or less which means it is hard to obtain TRT compared to private TRT clinics. If your GP thinks you might have low testosterone they will refer you to an endocrinologist and the wait time can be 3-4 months in some cases. So as you can see, it is possible to secure treatment on the NHS however the treatment options and length of time it takes to get onboarded can be less than ideal.
NHS TRT prescription process:
- You will meet with your GP to discuss your low testosterone and after the assessment, provided they don’t misdiagnose the symptoms, some GPs will order a blood test to measure low testosterone levels; however, if your level is within normal ranges (or close to the lower end), you’re out of luck and will not get issued TRT. The NHS requires you to have levels below 8.6 nmol/L which is considered drastically low when compared to most private TRT clinics.
- Successful patients receive a referral to an endocrinologist; it can take months for follow-up appointments, allowing symptoms to worsen.
- The optimal treatment approach may vary, and some methods can cause unwanted testosterone level fluctuations.
- Since NHS doctors don’t always use proper monitoring procedures to optimise the treatment, there may be higher risks of side effects or poor results.
Private TRT in the UK
Private TRT prescription process:
- Private TRT clinics, like Balance My Hormones, offer specialized TRT UK clinic services and offer a wide range of treatment options that are not found on the NHS. Private TRT clinics have access to a range of testosterone esters to help find you the best TRT protocol.
- Private TRT clinics will start with a low testosterone diagnosis through a range of blood tests and then you will have a doctors consultation with a medical specialist in testosterone replacement therapy.
- If you’re diagnosed with low testosterone, a personalised TRT plan is made between you and your doctor . Your doctor then monitors your testosterone levels throughout the treatment to ensure peak effectiveness and safety.
- Private TRT clinics offer a more streamlined process, shorter appointment waiting times, and access to wider treatment options, along with specialist doctors who are experts in TRT and HRT.
Self-Prescribed TRT Online
It’s possible to obtain TRT without a valid prescription, but this is strongly discouraged; unregulated treatment can result in significant risks, such as cardiovascular issues and hormonal imbalances. It is also illegal in the UK.
How to Find the Best TRT Clinic in the UK?
Finding the best testosterone replacement therapy (TRT) clinic in the UK requires careful research. Always look for clinics with:
· Medical credentials and expertise
· CQC registration
· Reputable founder’s experience
· Comprehensive evaluation process
· Range of treatment options
· Regular monitoring
· Positive patient reviews
· Transparency and communication
A good TRT clinic should employ doctors with extensive knowledge of treating deficiencies.
They should also be registered with the Care Quality Commission (CQC).
As part of your decision, always consider the experience and background of the clinic’s founder.
Take our own founder, Mike Kocsis; Mike has personally benefited from TRT for approximately 25 years. His extensive experience not only demonstrates a profound understanding of low testosterone therapy but also serves as a testament to his expertise.
Our CQC-registered clinic’s professionals specialise in hormone treatments. We also offer various TRT treatments to accommodate different preferences and lifestyles.
About this TRT Guide
Balance My Hormones TRT UK guide on Testosterone Replacement Therapy will help you find factual information about TRT in the UK and help you decide if it’s the right medical treatment for you. This guide aims to provide you with an overview of the most common questions we get asked by customers looking to start TRT. If you have any questions or concerns around TRT please feel free to get in touch and speak to our doctors who are experts in testosterone replacement therapy and hormone replacement therapy.
About the authors:
This guide was written by TRT UK experts Mike Kocsis and Dr Dan Robertson and medically peer reviewed by Dr George Touliatos, all of which have over 20 years experience in the UK TRT industry.
In this TRT guide we discuss the problems with low testosterone, what treatment options are available, whether it’s going to be right for you and how you can get TRT in the UK. This article has been extensively researched and fact checked by our doctors and independent medical peer experts.
TRT For Beginners Explainer Video
What is TRT?
Testosterone Replacement Therapy (TRT) in the UK is a medical treatment doctors prescribe (by injection or creams) to men and women who suffer from abnormally low testosterone levels once all other methods of boosting testosterone have been exhausted. TRT helps by alleviating the symptoms associated with low testosterone such as fatigue, low muscle mass and a low sex-drive. Opting for TRT should be seen as a life-long commitment and the decision to start TRT needs to be assessed by you and your doctor to ensure it’s the right treatment for you.
How does TRT work?
TRT works by administering a testosterone injection or cream to help restore hormones to an optimal level. Finding the right approach to rebalancing ones hormones is challenging as there are so many options to consider, TRT is just one option amongst many. TRT is not always necessary and the right approach should be taken by your doctor to ensure you get the best outcome. TRT can be a very effective treatment option for men who have exhausted other treatment avenues or who have a medical condition which means TRT is the only option available. If you are concerned about your health, why not take our free hormone quiz below.
Is TRT Safe?
TRT safety is a topic of ongoing research in the medical community.
Although TRT in the UK offers many significant benefits, it carries potential risks as well, however it is generally considered a safe effective treatment for suitable candidates.
Thus, patients should consider both the risks and rewards before starting treatment, particularly regarding each individual’s unique health circumstances.
What studies have been done on TRT?
A 2019 review found that TRT helps regulate the sexual response cycle in low testosterone men. It can also improve libido, erection quality, and sexual satisfaction, and minimise erectile dysfunction.
Another 2019 study of 25 patients reveals TRT offers modest bone density improvements; moreover, a recent study shows it can also support cognitive function.
In terms of risks, some studies suggest TRT may increase cardiovascular events, although others found no significant correlation.
A 2017 study of 44,000 low testosterone men found that TRT reduced the risk of heart attacks by 33% versus those not receiving hormone treatments. Further research is still needed in this field.
Want to know more? Check out our article on: Is TRT Safe?
What are the Benefits and Side Effects of TRT?
It’s important to understand the benefits and risks of TRT, below we have made a list of them.
Men undergoing TRT often notice improvements in their emotional, psychological, and physical well-being.
Common benefits of TRT include improvements in sexual function, increases in muscle mass and bone density, and mood regulation.
However, risks/side effects can include skin irritation, acne, infertility, and elevated red blood cell counts. Although these risks are rare and can be countered by medication such as HCG to maintain fertility, we will list them off below because it’s important you have a full understanding of both the Pros and Cons of TRT.
Our doctors evaluate each patient’s medical history, conduct a thorough physical examination, and check hormone levels through a blood test before prescribing TRT to balance risk and reward. You should also understand that Balance My Hormones conducted a study amongst it’s patients and found the average TRT success rate to be 85%, whilst the general average appears to be a lower, but still high, 75%.
What are the benefits of TRT?
- Increased energy levels
- Improved sex drive and sexual performance
- Increased muscle strength and mass
- Maintained bone density
- Improved body composition
- Mood regulation
- Reduced andropause symptoms
What are the side effects of TRT?
- Acne/oily skin
- Fluid retention
- Increased red blood cells count
- Breast tenderness or breast tissue growth
- Hair loss
- Prostate enlargement
- Irritability
For a full breakdown view our TRT Pros and Cons list.
Are you a candidate for TRT? Find out by taking our free hormone quiz:
What are the symptoms of low testosterone?
There a a range of symptoms associated with low testosterone, these can include poor sleep, lack of libido, increased body fat and reduced muscle mass.
Below is a list of some of the more common symptoms of low testosterone, if you have 3+ symptoms from the list below you should consider taking our hormone quiz below.
- Lack of energy
- Reduced sexual desire
- Difficulty achieving and maintaining erections
- Loss of muscle mass
- Loss of bone density
- High risk of osteoporosis
- Increased body fat
- Difficulty concentrating
If you are encountering three or more of these symptoms it could be you are suffering from low testosterone, however to confirm this you would need to speak to a registered doctor and obtain some blood tests.
Check your testosterone levels with our free hormone quiz:
What are normal testosterone levels?
It’s important to understand, the purpose of TRT is to restore normal testosterone levels, ensuring your body is hormone composition is balanced.
Normal levels of testosterone in males vary with age, time, physical activity, and overall health.
So what are normal testosterone levels? What should you be aiming for?
The reference range for total testosterone levels in adult males is between 300 and 1,000 nanograms per deciliter (ng/dL).
Crucially, testosterone levels peak during adolescence/early adulthood, then decline. Studies show that a 1% reduction in testosterone levels occurs annually after 30.
Normal testosterone levels in Infants and children
Normal testosterone levels in Adolescents
Normal testosterone levels in men and women (Adults)
Quick Low Testosterone Test
If you know your total testosterone reading from a previous blood test input the results to the left above to see if your testosterone levels are normal.
Low Testosterone Levels
You may have low testosterone depending on the symptoms you have, please contact us to find out how we can help.
Please Retry
The Total Testosterone Level You Entered Is Incorrect. Figure Must be in nmol/L you can use our converter here.
Normal Testosterone Levels
Your testosterone levels appear to be in the normal range.
LOOKING GOOD!
You must be over 38, have had your ovaries removed or have suffered with premature menopause to warrant further hormone tests.
Further investigation needed
Please contact us to discuss your hormones, we need your total testosterone levels to validate your hormone deficiency. You can order a blood test here.
Low Testosterone Levels
You may have low testosterone depending on the symptoms you have, please contact us to find out how we can help.
High Testosterone Levels
You appear to have higher than normal testosterone levels, please contact us for further investigation.
Normal Testosterone Levels
You appear to have normal testosterone levels. Contact us if you have any concerns.
What do the BSSM say about Testosterone?
The British Society for Sexual Medicine (BSSM) provide a set of guidelines that are worth reading if you think you may have a testosterone deficiency. They outline symptoms as we have listed below, what screening measures should be taken, thresholds for undertaking TRT and the benefits and risks associated with testosterone therapy.
Testosterone deficiency (TD) is an increasingly common problem with significant health implications, but its diagnosis and management can be challenging.
British Society for Sexual Medicine
Here is the link to the official BSSM testosterone deficiency in adults guidelines for you to review.
Think you might have low testosterone? You can use our free hormone quiz to assess your testosterone levels:
How to start TRT?
To start TRT you will need two blood tests and a doctor consultation to verify you qualify for testosterone replacement therapy.
At Balance My Hormones, we aim to simplify obtaining TRT through the following process:
1. Take our hormone test to gauge your testosterone levels and identify potential imbalances.
2. Get an At-Home testosterone test kit or the complete TRT starter bundle to assess testosterone levels and overall health plus speak to our doctors.
3. One of our experienced TRT doctors will contact you with the test results as soon as possible, offering insights into your hormone health and the most suitable course of action.
4. We offer testosterone for men and testosterone for women, so if you qualify for TRT and your doctor approves treatment you are now able to commence testosterone replacement therapy with Balance My Hormones.
TRT Before and After – Progress, Monitoring, and Evaluation
At Balance My Hormones, we take a personalised monitoring approach with regular evaluations at one, three, and six monthly intervals, because of this we are known as the UK’s premium TRT clinic.
Before starting TRT
Before starting, we conduct thorough evaluations to understand your current health, designing the ideal TRT treatment plan for your needs.
After starting TRT
Once you get started, we schedule follow-up appointments to assess your body’s response to treatment. We evaluate changes in testosterone levels and symptoms while monitoring for potential side effects.
Our team can adjust your TRT dosage or change administration methods to optimise your results, if necessary.
Our priority is tailoring the treatment to your specific needs, in turn enhancing your quality of life.
What Testosterone Blood Test is Needed to Start TRT?
To start UK TRT medication you will need to take two blood tests at different intervals to ensure your testosterone levels are consistently low. You can get started with TRT by ordering our TRT starter kit bundle which also includes a doctor consultation to review your blood test results.
Why do some men take TRT?
Not everyone needs TRT and it’s sometimes possible to improve your testosterone levels by adjusting your lifestyle by improving diet, exercise, sleep and stress levels.
Testosterone levels can become low in men and women for various reason, it’s not always clear why levels are low, however there are some more common causes of low blood serum testosterone levels which include:
- Primary hypogonadism
- Secondary hypogonadism
- Age-related decline of testosterone
- Hormonal imbalances such as taking contraceptive pills can cause hormone imbalances
- Certain medications or medical treatments (radiotherapy and chemotherapy)
- Lifestyle factors (stress, inadequate sleep, lack of exercise, poor diet and obesity, etc.)
- Steroid abuse causing the the natural production to be shutdown and disrupt hormones.
- Environmental factors such as fertilizers, plastics and leaching into the water supply/food
- Pesticide exposure in the environment can decrease hormone production
What are Some Alternatives to TRT?
Before starting TRT, doctors may suggest alternative safe treatments based on what might be causing your low testosterone levels such as:
- · Lifestyle improvement: Positive lifestyle changes e.g. a balanced diet or more regular exercise can help.
- · Weight management: Around 70% of overweight men have low testosterone. Therefore, losing weight or taking weight loss medication can help improve testosterone levels.
- · Testosterone boosters: Dietary supplements that are known to increase testosterone such as ashwagandha or other testosterone boosters.
Notably, these methods do not always work, especially for very low testosterone levels. In such cases TRT may be prescribed to give significant improvements to your testosterone levels.
What to Expect on TRT?
What can you expect when starting TRT? How long does it take for testosterone to work?
The benefits of TRT can be improvements in libido, mood, vitality, and energy, however the TRT timeline to see changes can vary from person to person.
The overall goal is to achieve a gradual improvement in overall health. Give your body time to adjust and respond to the treatment positively.
Following your treatment plan and our guidelines should help give positive results overall.
What to Ask Your Doctor
Before starting, always get the necessary information from your healthcare provider first.
Our dedicated team is committed to giving our patients a comprehensive understanding of TRT. We always encourage people to ask questions and address any concerns early on.
Common questions include:
· How does TRT work?
· How long does to take TRT to work?
· Testosterone injections vs gels?
· Is TRT safe?
· Will TRT affect my fertility?
· How will you monitor my progress while on TRT?
· How long will I need to be on TRT?
Is TRT For Life?
TRT should be seen as a life-long treatment aimed at restoring your testosterone levels to a health optimal range for life.
When patients stop TRT, testosterone levels often decline causing symptoms to return within 6 months. Committing to life-long TRT therapy can raise concerns; however, focusing on TRT’s benefits is essential to leading a more fulfilling life as the long-term benefits always outweigh the negative symptoms of low testosterone. It’s important to have patience when starting TRT and to work with your doctor to find the optimal protocol and dose that works best with your lifestyle and health conditions. You need to bear in mind it can take time to fine-tune the dose of TRT, however it’s important to stick to the course and you will reap the benefits long-term.
Which testosterone is best for TRT?
Testosterone Injections
Injections are available in different doses and formulations, your doctor will prescribe whichever best suits your needs and hormonal levels.
Testosterone injections are administered subcutaneously or intramuscularly.
Pros
· Rapid absorption
· Stable hormone levels over time
· Cost-effective
Cons
· Mild discomfort or pain at the injection site
· Frequent clinic visits (if you can’t self-administer)
Testosterone Gels & Creams
Testosterone creams & gels are among the most popular forms of TRT and they are applied just once a day, often on the shoulders, upper arms, abdomen, upper thighs, and scrotum.
Pros
· Easy to apply
· Non-invasive
· No pain
· Available in different doses
· Lower risk of hormone fluctuations
Cons
· May cause skin irritation
· Risk of accidental transfer
· Long drying time
Oral Testosterone Pills
Testosterone pills such as Kyzatrex are available to people who meet the required criteria.
Pros
· Easy to take (2 pills per day at doctor prescribed dose)
· Non-invasive
· No pain
· Discreet and avoids injection site issues or skin irritation
· Lower risk of hormone fluctuations
Cons
· Increased liver stress vs injections which release testosterone directly into the muscle
· More expensive than injections and creams
· Potential side effects such as high blood pressure and nausea
· Requires regular monitoring of liver and blood pressure
· Newer product so long-term safety data is limited
TRT Success Rates: does TRT work?
Various factors influence TRT success rates, including age, method, testosterone dosage, and pre-existing conditions.
In a study of over 380 TRT patients, around 70% said they were satisfied with the results.
Balance My Hormones conducted a study with over 60 random customers to assess the overall effectiveness of TRT. The results of our study were overwhelmingly positive with a 94% improvement in symptoms since starting TRT, you can read the results of our TRT study here.
Irrespective of factors impacting TRT’s success, patients can expect success rates exceeding 75%. The chances can be even higher when you follow your doctor’s instructions.
Feel free to read through the 130+ positive reviews in our testimonials section to learn how our effective treatments have impacted others’ lives.
Our TRT before and after pictures show you how TRT impacts your body physically when taken in conjunction with a healthy lifestyle.
Think you might have low testosterone? See if you are a good candidate for TRT by taking our free hormone quiz:
How much does TRT Cost?
The cost of TRT varies based on testosterone dose, administration method, and frequency.
Balance My Hormones offers several reasonably priced TRT packages matching our patients’ unique needs. These include medication and delivery costs, Personal Case Manager (PCM) support, and our specialist doctors’ support before, during, and after treatment.
To learn more about our packages or the potential cost of treatment, contact us now.
Try our free hormone quiz to check for low testosterone:
Is TRT Legal in the UK?
Testosterone Replacement Therapy (TRT) is legal in the UK but must be prescribed by a licensed doctor and there must be a legitimate reason for taking TRT.
To get a TRT prescription by a doctor your total testosterone must be less than 15nmol/L.
Doctors review patients on a case by case basis to assess whether they think TRT will be the right approach and best treatment option. A low testosterone assessment conducted by doctors will involve blood tests taken weeks apart from each other to ensure your testosterone readings are similar on each occasion to ensure accuracy and to validate the need for TRT.
Frequently Asked Questions
What is Hypogonadism?
Hypogonadism refers to reduced testosterone production by gonads in the male body, often due to abnormalities in the brain or testes. It’s diagnosed through a blood test and treated with TRT.
What does TRT stand for?
TRT stands for Testosterone Replacement Therapy.
Is TRT worth it?
For men with clinically diagnosed low testosterone, yes, TRT can definitely be worth it, addressing symptoms and improving affected men’s health and well-being.
How to get TRT on the NHS?
Getting TRT through the NHS can be challenging. Most NHS doctors don’t have extensive TRT knowledge, so they do not prescribe TRT readily.
You’ll first need to book a GP consultation; they may refer you to a specialist who will check blood test results, symptoms, and health conditions to evaluate whether exogenous testosterone may help.
How to get a TRT prescription?
First, check your testosterone levels via testosterone tests, then book a free consultation with our private clinic doctors to begin discovering the underlying cause(s) of your current health condition. If needed, our private clinic doctors can then provide a TRT prescription.
How much is TRT per month?
The cost of TRT varies with dose, medication type, and frequency. Contact us today to explore our unique pricing packages.
Will TRT improve libido?
Several studies show TRT can improve libido and sexual function in men with low testosterone.
Will TRT help build muscle?
TRT will increase muscle mass as long as you are exercising; higher testosterone levels can promote protein synthesis and reduce muscle protein breakdown.
Will TRT help with fatigue?
Testosterone is involved in increasing vitality and energy levels in men. Thus, many low testosterone men feel more energised after starting TRT.
Can TRT help with anxiety?
Testosterone influences mood and emotional health. Some evidence suggests TRT may alleviate anxiety and improve symptoms of depression in low testosterone men.
Will TRT shrink my testicles?
TRT may reduce testicle size due to the pituitary gland in the brain producing less luteinizing hormone, thus signaling the testes not to produce additional testosterone, resulting in a lack of activity; this is reversible by readjusting testosterone doses or discontinuing TRT.
Will TRT cause man boobs?
TRT may increase breast tissue by converting testosterone into oestrogen (a female sexual and reproductive development hormone). High levels can cause “man boobs.” However, the risk is relatively low with proper oestrogen control and TRT monitoring.
Does TRT increase risks of prostate cancer?
TRY may increase prostate cancer risks, depending on your prostate’s health. Studies investigating the link show mixed results. Hence, healthcare professionals usually perform further tests to check TRT is a safe treatment for you.
Will I lose fertility on TRT?
TRT may negatively influence fertility by reducing testicular testosterone and sperm production. Some doctors simultaneously prescribe HCG with TRT injections to help.
Is TRT steroids?
Anabolic steroid vs TRT use are similar to the role testosterone plays, but used for different purposes. TRT is a legitimate medical procedure to elevate testosterone levels in deficient men. Anabolic steroids are non-medical and typically enhance athletic performance.
How to lower hematocrit on TRT?
There are options to lower red blood cell counts while on TRT, e.g., monitor hormone levels, adjust testosterone doses, or consider different delivery methods.
How much HCG to take with TRT?
Dosage depends on factors such as fertility considerations, individual needs, and hormone levels. Typically, the starting HCG dose is between 250 and 500 IU.
What’s the best age to start TRT?
There’s no “best” age to start TRT, but it’s generally more common among older men. Younger men with testosterone deficiencies may also benefit.
How to inject TRT?
1 Wash hands
2 Prepare injection site
3 Draw the appropriate dosage of medication in the syringe
4 Remove air bubbles
5 Insert the needle at a 90-degree angle and inject the medication
How is TRT administered?
Administration routes include transdermal/subcutaneous injections and topical creamsTestosterone Replacement Therapy (TRT)
Feeling low on energy, motivation, or drive? It could be more than just a rough week — low testosterone can affect your mood, focus, and overall wellbeing. Testosterone plays a key role in energy levels, muscle strength, and even mental clarity. If you’ve been feeling off lately, it might be time to check your levels. Book a blood test today and get clear answers about your hormone health — because knowing is the first step to feeling better.
Balance My Hormones makes it easy find out if you have low testosterone, all you need is a simple blood test and an appointment with one of our GMC registered doctors, click the link below to get started and view more information about the process.It's a fact of life that the human body changes as it gets older. For women, menopause is a significant life change that often brings serious physical complications. Men don't experience a comparable change, but as men age, many do begin to suffer from hypogonadism, a condition ultimately stemming from low levels of testosterone.
Starting around age 30, men tend to lose about one percent of their testosterone per year. For some, the amount lost is higher and for others, it is lower. There is a normal range when it comes to testosterone levels, and once a man hits the lower limit of this normal range, problems begin, which usually leads to hypogonadism.
Some studies even show a link between diabetes and hypogonadism, as men with diabetes seem to be more prone to hypogonadism and the accompanying difficulties.
To be diagnosed with hypogonadism requires more than just having low levels of testosterone in the blood. Doctors will also factor in other symptoms, which include:
- fatigue,
- low sexual desire,
- worsening sexual function,
- erection problems,
- weight gain, and
- problems gaining muscle.
Not all symptoms are required for a diagnosis, only a combination of at least a few symptoms and low testosterone in the blood. While these symptoms can be difficult to live with, low levels of testosterone can eventually cause other problems. According to Alex Pastuszak, MD, a urologist with University of Utah Health, "Guys with low testosterone levels have worse heart health and their bone density is lower. Guys may not sleep as well or complain that their thinking is 'cloudy.' Of these, the most concerning is obviously the increased risks of heart disease, which can lead to an early death."
For most of human history, men who suffered from hypogonadism didn't realize anything was wrong and just thought that they were slowing down with age. Things have changed. As Pastuszak puts it, "Back in the day, guys would just assume they were getting older and slowing down, but in the last decade, there has been a marketing push telling men that they have low testosterone. A lot more men know that slowing down isn't normal and they can get treated for it."
The most effective treatment tends to be testosterone, but it comes with risks, namely side effects including shrunken testicles, infertility, increased estrogen levels, increased red blood cell count, and growth of breast tissue.
There are other drugs that are effective. One of them, HCG, is a substance that directly tells the testicles to make more testosterone. The other, Clomid, tricks your body into thinking hormone levels are low, which stimulates the testicles to produce more testosterone.
While these drugs are effective and don't have as many side effects, they are not without their issues. HCG can be prohibitively expensive, even for those with good insurance. Clomid tends to work better for younger men, while older men sometimes don't see an effect.
While current methods to combat hypogonadism have their issues, doctors and scientists are optimistic that eventually new techniques and technologies will eliminate this problem and allow men to age without worrying about low testosterone levels.
Testosterone levels drop with age, but medication is not your only option. Urologist James Hotaling, MD, shares evidence-backed strategies that can help men boost their testosterone naturally.
Feb 19, 2025
Believe it or not, erectile dysfunction can be a symptom of diabetes. In fact, half of men diagnosed with diabetes experience erectile dysfunction within 10 years of their diagnosis.
Jan 31, 2025
At some point in their lives, nearly all men will experience some degree of prostate enlargement. Understanding the risk factors can help you be proactive with your health and potentially...
Nov 08, 2024
Understanding what a swollen testicle means and how to treat it can go a long way to easing the mind and fixing the problem.Search Results
Understanding Male Hypogonadism
Male hypogonadism occurs when the male sex glands (testes) don’t make enough of the male sex hormone testosterone, or don’t make enough sperm, or both. Testosterone plays a major role in male growth and development during puberty. Some men are born with hypogonadism. In other cases, it occurs later in life and is caused by injury or infection. The condition can affect men at any age. Symptoms vary depending on how close to puberty the condition starts.
What causes male hypogonadism?
There are two main types: primary hypogonadism and secondary hypogonadism.
Primary hypogonadism
This occurs because of a problem that affects the testes. This problem may be caused by:
-
Chemotherapy or radiation therapy for cancer.
-
Injury to the testicles.
-
Klinefelter syndrome, a chromosome defect.
-
Tumors.
-
Some kinds of autoimmune disorders.
-
Defects in one or more of the enzymes needed to make testosterone.
-
The testicles have not dropped down to their permanent position by the time a boy is 1 year old (undescended testicles).
-
Too much iron in the blood (hemochromatosis).
-
Inflammation caused by infections, such as mumps.
-
Alcohol and marijuana use.
Secondary hypogonadism
This is caused by a problem with the pituitary gland or hypothalamus. These are parts of the brain that direct the testes to make testosterone. Conditions that can cause this type include:
-
Pituitary tumors and the treatment used (surgery or radiation therapy).
-
Head injury.
-
Kallmann syndrome, a rare genetic syndrome.
-
Certain medicines.
-
Use of anabolic steroids, alcohol, marijuana, or opioid pain medicines.
-
Chronic infections associated with weight loss, such as HIV/AIDS.
-
Prader-Willi syndrome, a genetic disorder.
Symptoms of male hypogonadism
If hypogonadism occurs before or during puberty, a boy’s symptoms may include:
-
Delayed puberty, such as:
-
Voice does not get deeper.
-
Lack of muscle development.
-
Penis, testes, and scrotum are not fully developed.
-
Lack of pubic and underarm hair.
-
No growth of body hair underarm, face, or groin.
-
Arms and legs grow abnormally long.
-
-
Breasts may get bigger (gynecomastia).
-
Low sperm count or no sperm, causing infertility.
Adult men
For adult men, symptoms can include:
-
Erectile dysfunction.
-
Lack of desire for sex.
-
Tiredness.
-
Low sperm count and small testes.
-
Inability to have children (infertility).
-
Less muscle mass.
-
Mood changes.
-
Less body hair and beard growth.
-
Loss of bone mass (osteoporosis) and bone fractures.
-
More body fat.
-
Breast tissue development (gynecomastia).
Some of these symptoms can have other causes. So, a diagnosis often can’t be made right away.
Diagnosing male hypogonadism
A doctor will take a health history and do a complete exam. If a boy has developmental abnormalities or delayed puberty, the doctor will check the boy’s penis and testes. This is done to see if they are at a normal stage for his age.
The doctor will ask about symptoms. Many symptoms of male hypogonadism can be caused by other conditions. So, blood tests will be done to check your testosterone levels. Depending on the results, you may need another blood test. Or you may have other tests, such as:
-
Bone densitometry test. This is done to check for osteoporosis.
-
Semen analysis. This is done to rule out problems, such as not having any sperm. It also acts as a baseline sperm count.
-
Genetic studies. This is done to see if an inherited condition is lowering testosterone.
-
Ultrasound of the testes. This is done to check for growths or lumps.
Treatment for male hypogonadism
If the doctor finds that an underlying disorder is the cause, then treatment will target that disorder. But the main treatment is replacing testosterone. This can be done in different ways. Talk with your doctor about which method is best for you. Also ask what testing you need to be sure you get the right dose:
-
Topical. Topical medicines are put on the skin. They come in creams, gels, liquids, and patches.
-
Shot (injection). Testosterone shots can be given at different time intervals. Some shots are short-acting, and others are long-acting.
-
By mouth (oral). The FDA has approved an oral testosterone capsule for the treatment of some kinds of hypogonadism. This medicine should not be used to treat age-related hypogonadism.
-
In the nose. Testosterone gel is put into the nostrils.
-
Implanted pellets. Testosterone pellets are placed under the skin. The medicine is slowly released over a few months.
For boys
One choice for boys is to wait and see if see if normal puberty development happens on its own. In some cases, it may just be stalled. But short-term, low-dose testosterone therapy may be used as a treatment for boys. This can help to get development started.
Living with male hypogonadism
It can be hard for boys and men to deal with this condition. Boys may feel awkward or depressed if their friends and classmates are going through puberty when they are not.
Men with hypogonadism may have less interest in sex. They may also have erectile dysfunction and be unable to have children (infertile). For many men, this can lead to feelings of low self-esteem and depression. They may also have less energy, mood changes, and memory problems.
Talk therapy (counseling) may be helpful for boys or men who feel worried or depressed about these issues.
When to contact your doctor
Boys or men who have any of the symptoms listed above should see their doctor to discuss these issues.
Online Medical Reviewer: Rita Sather RN
Online Medical Reviewer: Sabrina Felson MDWhat Causes Low Testosterone?
As men begin to age, the amount of testosterone in their bodies decreases. This natural aging process is often what causes decreased testosterone. Up to 40 percent of men begin to experience a reduction in this male hormone in their 40s.
Deficient testosterone levels in young men are less common, and they can happen for a number of different reasons. Read on to learn what causes low testosterone and testosterone deficiency and whether you could be at risk.
Never Miss a Beat!
Subscribe to Our HealthBeat Newsletter!
Thank you for subscribing!
You can now select the specific newsletters you'd like to receive.
You are already subscribed.
Subscribe to more newsletters in our email preference center.
Sorry, an error occurred. Please try again later.
Get Healthy Tips Sent to Your Phone!
What Is Low Testosterone?
Testosterone is important for male development and fertility. This hormone, produced in the testicles, is responsible for the bodily changes that happen during puberty and for making sperm. Testosterone levels are considered low when the body does not produce enough testosterone on its own.
Testosterone is a crucial hormone in the development of the body. It is responsible for the growth of muscle mass, bone density, even facial and body hair. It also influences the deepening of the voice, the production of sperm, the growth of the prostate, and the sex drive of the individual.
Symptoms of Low Testosterone
Men with a testosterone deficiency may notice physical symptoms, such as fatigue, erectile dysfunction, or an inability to conceive with their partner.
Symptoms of low testosterone are sometimes difficult to recognize since they can look similar to symptoms of other conditions. They also may vary by age. Symptoms include:
• Infertility.
• Erectile dysfunction.
• Low body fat.
• Depression or other changes in mood.
• Low sex drive.
• Low muscle mass.
• Hair thinning.
• Fatigue.
What are the Causes Low Testosterone?
Testosterone deficiency syndrome and hypogonadism are other terms often used to describe testosterone levels that have dropped. Some men have low testosterone levels all their lives, while others develop it later in life.
Hypogonadism is a combination of low testosterone levels on evaluation and symptoms suggestive of having low testosterone. There are two main types of hypogonadism: primary and secondary.
Primary hypogonadism
Primary hypogonadism is either inherited or occurs after an illness or injury. It is a testicular problem — the testes do not produce enough testosterone. Primary hypogonadism can be caused by:
• Testicles that failed to descend at birth.
• High levels of iron.
• Klinefelter syndrome.
Secondary hypogonadism
Secondary hypogonadism happens when certain parts of the brain — such as the pituitary gland, which produces hormones, or the hypothalamus, which helps regulate hormones — are damaged.
Factors related to secondary hypogonadism are:
• Age.
• High levels of body fat.
• Autoimmune diseases.
Hypogonadism Treatment
Hypogonadism is a treatable condition with a variety of treatment options, although primary hypogonadism is more difficult to treat. Men who have Type 1 or Type 2 diabetes are especially at risk. Doctors often will perform a blood test if you are showing symptoms of deficient testosterone levels before prescribing any treatment.
Low testosterone treatment options
There are many options to increase testosterone in cases of low testosterone, such as:
• Gels
• Creams
• Patches
• Injections
• Implants
While all of these treatments will introduce testosterone into the body in a controlled way, there may be side effects of these treatments, such as acne, worse sleep apnea, breast enlargement, testicle shrinkage, and excess red blood cell production resulting in blood clots. Be sure to contact your doctor if your testosterone treatment is having any of these side effects.
For more information about primary and secondary hypogonadism, visit the UPMC Men’s Health Center or call 1-877-647-4636(4MEN).
Editor's Note: This article was originally published on , and was last reviewed on .
About Men’s Health Center
The UPMC Men’s Health Center evaluates and treats conditions affecting men’s sexual and reproductive health. With years of clinical experience in male sexual medicine and surgery, our team has treated a wide variety of conditions and performed thousands of surgeries. We are dedicated to providing patients the highest level of quality care. Our providers understand the intimate nature of male sexual difficulties, and we will work to help you restore your normal level of sexual function in a comfortable, educational, and discreet environment.By Mike Kocsis | 7 minutes read | Last updated: April 24, 2025 Categories: Testosterone
Medically Reviewed by Dr. George Touliatos
Both men and women experience hormonal changes as they age. Women see a sudden drop in their sex hormone level, while men experience a gradual decline.
Some doctors are seeing older men experience the same symptoms as women going through perimenopause and menopause and are beginning to question whether men also experience menopause due to declining testosterone with age.
This article explains the term ‘male menopause’ and discusses its causes, symptoms, and treatment options.
What is male menopause?
Male menopause is a term used to describe hormonal changes that occur in men as they age. Some experts also call it late-onset hypogonadism or androgen (testosterone) deficiency.
Unlike women, age-related hormonal changes in men do not occur during a short time period. Testosterone decreases gradually over a period of several years.
It is normal for men to have low testosterone levels in their bloodstream after the age of 50. However, it can also occur due to certain health conditions, including diabetes, obesity, etc.
Testosterone is a male sex hormone that regulates many important processes such as fertility, bone density, and muscle mass. Fluctuation can cause menopausal symptoms, but in many cases, menopausal symptoms are not directly related to testosterone levels – they can be associated with a certain medication or health problems.
How is male menopause different from female menopause?
Male menopause is often misunderstood and related to female menopause, in which a sudden drop in estrogen (a female sex hormone) levels occurs. For men, the decline is more steady and over a longer period of time decline at a rate of 1 per cent every year after 30 years of age.
- The majority of older men have healthy testosterone levels. Only 10 per cent to 25 per cent have low testosterone.
- Every woman goes through menopause , while not all men have menopause.
- Symptoms of female menopause start appearing soon after the drop in progesterone and estrogen levels. They emerge fast and are severe, while male menopause symptoms take time to appear and are less severe.
- This condition is called male menopause because its symptoms are similar to those of female menopause.
What are the symptoms of male menopause?
Male menopause produces mental, physical and sexual symptoms. Some examples of these symptoms are:
- Low energy levels
- Change in mood
- Depression
- Reduced motivation and self-esteem
- Inability to perform strenuous tasks properly
- Muscle and bone weakness
- Trouble getting an erection
- Low sex drive
- Breast enlargement
- Low sperm count
A study published in The New England Journal of Medicine concludes that sexual symptoms including erectile dysfunction, low libido, and poor morning erection are the most common symptoms of male menopause.
Rare symptoms of male menopause
Some men experience uncommon symptoms. Some of these are:
- Hot flushes
- Swollen breasts
- Loss of body hair
What causes male menopause?
While male menopause is linked with age-related testosterone decrease, many doctors believe it is not the only cause of this condition. For f it were true, every man would experience it.
Male menopause can express itself differently in different men, the symptoms of two menopausal men are not always similar. While these symptoms appear in aged men having low testosterone, they also appear in aged men having type 2 diabetes, high blood pressure, obesity, and other similar conditions.
Risk factors that may contribute to it are:
- Lack of physical activity
- Lack of sleep
- Stress
- Anxiety or depression
- Excessive consumption of alcohol
- Low self-confidence
- Poor diet
How is it diagnosed?
In order to start treatment for male menopause, your doctor will first have to diagnose the issue causing it. As we have previously mentioned, many factors can contribute to this issue. That is why identifying the real issue is important.
A doctor may use the following ways to diagnose the cause.
Ask about your symptoms
Many men often get shy while talking about their menopause symptoms (particularly when talking about their sex life) and hesitate to tell everything they are experiencing to their doctors. But staying quiet will not help, it may even complicate things for your doctor.
A symptom is evidence of a health issue. It would help if you described them clearly and in as much detail to point your doctor in the right direction so you can receive the correct diagnosis.
Physical examination
A physical examination is performed to identify possible medical signs. Your doctor may look at:
- Your body mass and bone strength
- Your testes and breast size
- The amount of body hair
- Lumps in testes and scrotum
Blood tests
This test is performed to check your blood testosterone levels. Your blood sample will be taken from your blood vessel located in your arm and sent to the lab for analysis.
Testosterone levels fluctuate throughout the day. Generally, they are high in the morning, so your blood sample will be taken in the morning. If the report of your first test shows you have low testosterone levels, the doctor will ask you to have another blood test to ensure you really have low T.
In adult men, 300 to 1,000 nanograms per deciliter (ng/dL) testosterone level is considered normal. An amount lower than this is regarded as abnormal, and it shows you have testosterone deficiency.
Rule out medical conditions
Your doctor may also ask you to have some other tests like a CT scan, genetic studies, or hormone test to rule out certain medical conditions.
A CT scan is done when your doctor thinks your low T is due to a pituitary tumour. Similarly, a genetic test is done when your doctor thinks a genetic issue is causing the abnormality. It shows your genetic makeup to your doctor and helps them identify any abnormalities in your genes.
Pituitary hormones control the production of testosterone by testes. If your pituitary gland isn’t working properly, your testes will not get a proper message and produce low testosterone. Therefore, hormone tests are performed to check the levels of pituitary hormones.
Once the cause has been diagnosed, your doctor will design a suitable treatment plan.
Is there any treatment for male menopause?
Your doctor will recommend some lifestyle changes if your menopause symptoms are not severe.
Depending on your individual circumstances, you may receive a dietry plan or medication to make sure you’re in peak physical condition. This is to help you manage your symptoms and tackle the issue causing menopause.
If your testosterone levels are too low or lifestyle changes are not producing noticeable results, your doctor may suggest testosterone replacement therapy (TRT). It requires you to take the prescribed testosterone dose regularly as per your doctor’s advice. Its goal is to restore your blood testosterone levels and reduce low T symptoms.
Am I the right candidate for TRT?
TRT is an effective treatment that has helped millions of men to reduce their menopause symptoms. But, it does come with some side effects and risks. Patients who are on TRT may report the following issues.
- Acne
- Low sperm count
- Increase in breast size
- Risk of blood clot formation
- Risk of prostate abnormalities
You need to discuss side effects with your doctor to determine if the treatment is safe for you. People with certain medical conditions such as prostate cancer, urinary tract infection, and breast cancer are usually advised to not have this treatment. Men who plan to have children should also avoid this therapy as it can decrease sperm production.
Things you need to know before starting TRT
If you are planning to start TRT, here are some important points you need to know before getting started.
- TRT is given in different forms. Each form has its pros and cons. Discuss them in detail with your doctor to select the best possible TRT form.
- Once you start the treatment, you will have regular follow-up sessions. During these sessions, your doctor will check your testosterone levels, body fat, bone density, and prostate cancer risk.
- Some TRT side effects can be life-threatening for some people. You should tell your doctor your medical history and discuss risks before selecting this treatment option.
- TRT is a life-long therapy. Your testosterone levels will decline and come back to what they used to be before starting TRT if you stop taking testosterone.
Conclusion
Male menopause is a condition that is difficult to diagnose because its symptoms vary from man to man and there can be a number of causes.
One of the causes of menopause is low testosterone. If you are diagnosed with it, you should talk to your doctor about TRT, which can bring your low testosterone levels back to normal.
References/Bibliography/ Further Reading/Citations/Scientific Studies
Pines, A., 2011. Male menopause: is it a real clinical syndrome?. Climacteric, 14(1), pp.15-17.
Huo, S., Scialli, A.R., McGarvey, S., Hill, E., Tügertimur, B., Hogenmiller, A., Hirsch, A.I. and Fugh-Berman, A., 2016. Treatment of men for “low testosterone”: a systematic review. PloS one, 11(9), p.e0162480.
Evidence Based Research
This article has been researched and written based on scientific evidence and fact sheets that have then been crossed checked by our team of doctors and subject matter experts.
References, sources and studies used alongside our own in-house research have been cited below, most of which contain external clickable links to reviewed scientific paper that contain date stamped evidence.
Our team of healthcare experts and GMC registered doctors are licensed to UK GMC standards. We strive to provide you with the latest evidence based, researched articles that are unbiased, honest and provide you with accurate insights, statistics and helpful information on the discussed topic to ensure you gain a better understanding of the subject. You can read more about our Editorial Process by clicking here.
We value your feedback on our articles, if you have a well-researched paper you would like to share with us please contact us.
Quick Low Testosterone Test
If you know your total testosterone reading from a previous blood test input the results to the left above to see if your testosterone levels are normal.
Low Testosterone Levels
You may have low testosterone depending on the symptoms you have, please contact us to find out how we can help.
Please Retry
The Total Testosterone Level You Entered Is Incorrect. Figure Must be in nmol/L you can use our converter here.
Normal Testosterone Levels
Your testosterone levels appear to be in the normal range.
LOOKING GOOD!
You must be over 38, have had your ovaries removed or have suffered with premature menopause to warrant further hormone tests.
Further investigation needed
Please contact us to discuss your hormones, we need your total testosterone levels to validate your hormone deficiency. You can order a blood test here.
Low Testosterone Levels
You may have low testosterone depending on the symptoms you have, please contact us to find out how we can help.
High Testosterone Levels
You appear to have higher than normal testosterone levels, please contact us for further investigation.
Normal Testosterone Levels
You appear to have normal testosterone levels. Contact us if you have any concerns.Testosterone, one of the “sex hormones,” has both anabolic and androgenic properties. Testosterone is produced by the testes and adrenal glands in the male and the ovaries and adrenal glands in the female. It travels through the bloodstream and binds to androgen receptors, affecting almost every organ in the body, especially muscle, bone, fat cells, and reproductive organs.
Testosterone can travel through the bloodstream bound to the proteins albumin and sex hormone-binding globulin (SHBG) or as free testosterone, which is unattached. Only about 2-5% of testosterone is freely floating in the bloodstream.
Because free testosterone and testosterone bound to albumin can easily bind to androgen receptors, they are called bioavailable testosterone. After testosterone binds to its receptor, testosterone, and the androgen receptor enter the body cell and influence how your DNA (the genetic material in each cell) directs protein production.
Table of Contents
What Is Total Testosterone?
Total testosterone is a measurement of testosterone bound to SHBG, albumin, and free testosterone. Testosterone bound to SHBG is tightly bound and, therefore, is inactive. Testosterone bound to albumin is loosely bound and, like free testosterone, can bind to androgen receptors.
Free Testosterone Vs. Total Testosterone
When the testes secrete testosterone, about 5% to 10% is converted to a stronger androgen, dihydrotestosterone, which affects the prostate and hair follicles. An additional 0.2% is converted by aromatase into estradiol to influence bone and the brain. The rest circulates in the bloodstream, either bound or free, affecting tissues such as muscle, until the liver metabolizes it.
Since free testosterone is bioavailable, it would follow that decreased free testosterone levels would lead to the symptoms associated with low testosterone.
When 2,641 men were studied, researchers found that men with normal total testosterone levels and decreased free testosterone levels were older and in poorer health, while men with low total testosterone and normal free testosterone were more likely to be younger and obese. They concluded that low free testosterone is associated with hypogonadal symptoms, even if total testosterone levels were normal.
How Free Testosterone Affects Your Health
Testosterone has both androgenic and anabolic effects on the body and can affect many bodily functions.
In men, testosterone helps maintain and support:
- Muscle mass
- Muscle strength
- Bone density and strength
- Normal fat distribution
- Body and facial hair
- Red blood cell production
- Sperm production
- Libido
- Erections
- Fertility
- Skin elasticity
- Voice changes during puberty
- Mood
In women, testosterone helps maintain and support:
- Normal ovarian function
- Bone strength
- Sex drive
Conditions Associated With Low Testosterone Levels
Testosterone, like all hormones, is tightly controlled in the body. Both too high and too low testosterone levels can adversely affect your health.
Hypogonadism, or low testosterone levels in men, results from a problem producing testosterone in the testes or the pituitary gland/hypothalamus.
Besides problems in the pituitary, hypothalamus, or testes, several conditions are associated with low testosterone levels, including:
- Obesity: Obesity is associated with progressively lower total and free testosterone levels. The impact is significant. An increase in weight by one body mass index (BMI) unit is associated with a two percent decline in total testosterone.
- Damage to the testes: The testes produce over ninety-five percent of testosterone in males.
- Chemotherapy or radiation: Chemotherapy or radiation can damage testicular cells.
- Diabetes: Men with diabetes are more likely to have low testosterone levels, and men with low testosterone levels are more likely to have diabetes.
- Metabolic syndrome: A constellation of symptoms that includes increased abdominal fat, metabolic syndrome can impact testosterone levels in the same way as obesity.
- Autoimmune diseases: Testosterone deficiency has been linked with autoimmune disorders and an increase in inflammation.
- Thyroid dysfunction: Thyroid disease is associated with increased SHBG in hyperthyroidism and decreased SHBG in hypothyroidism, both of which affect total testosterone levels.
- Medication side effects: Glucocorticoids, ketoconazole, and opioids are associated with decreased testosterone production.
- Kidney disease: End-stage kidney disease and the use of hemodialysis are associated with low testosterone levels.
- Alcoholism: Excess alcohol consumption affects the hypothalamus-pituitary-testes axis, leading to a decrease in testosterone levels.
- Aging: Each decade of life is associated with a 10.1% decline in total testosterone levels and a 23.8% decline in free testosterone levels.
- Genetic conditions: Hemochromatosis, sickle cell disease, and thalassemia are all associated with disorders of the pituitary-testes axis.
Symptoms Associated With Low Testosterone Levels
Several studies have shown that testosterone levels decrease with age. The fall is gradual, but by the eighth decade, up to one-third of men may have total testosterone levels that fall in the hypogonadal range, and 50% of men have low free testosterone levels.
Studies have shown that testosterone levels fall in men at a rate of 0.4% to 2% per year, after the age of 30. There seems to be little variability in the rate of fall across ethnic groups and geographic regions. The cause of decreasing testosterone levels with age seems to be an age-related decline in Leydig (testosterone-producing) cells in the testes, reduced enzyme activity, and a reduced response by the testes to luteinizing hormone, a hormone secreted by the pituitary gland.
The Endocrine Society recommends diagnosing testosterone deficiency only in men with symptoms consistent with a deficiency and unequivocally low blood testosterone levels. This is because the threshold testosterone level at which symptoms develop is not known.
Symptoms of low testosterone in men may include:
- Reduced energy
- Reduced endurance
- Fatigue
- Visual field changes
- Inability to smell
- Depression
- Reduced motivation
- Poor concentration
- Impaired memory
- Irritability
- Infertility
- Reduced sex drive
- Erectile dysfunction
- Enlarged breast tissue
- Loss of body hair
- Fractures associated with little to no trauma
Symptoms Associated With Having High Testosterone Levels
Having an elevated level of naturally occurring testosterone is unusual. Potential causes of high testosterone levels include tumors, using anabolic steroids, and taking testosterone supplements.
However, when testosterone levels are too high, potential side effects include:
- Low sperm counts
- Infertility
- Acne
- Headaches
- Insomnia
- Liver disease
- Enlarged prostate
- Increased risk of blood clots
- Increased risk of sleep apnea
- High blood pressure
- Mood changes
Testosterone levels gradually decrease after about age 30, even though the level of SHBG increases with age. Since total testosterone comprises free and bound testosterone, if total testosterone declines with age and SHBG increases with age, then free testosterone levels decline much more than total testosterone levels.
While determining total testosterone levels is important, if you are experiencing symptoms consistent with low testosterone levels (hypogonadism), low free testosterone levels may be a better indicator of hypogonadism, especially in older men.
How To Test Your Testosterone Levels
Testosterone levels should be measured in the morning using a reliable assay test. Testing should be repeated at least once and should include total testosterone levels and free testosterone levels. Some men, especially older men, have normal total testosterone levels but low free testosterone.
Normal lab values may vary by laboratory. However, the standard lower limit of normal for total testosterone is 300 ng/dl (10.4 nmol/liter), and the standard lower limit for free testosterone is 50 pg/ml (0.17 nmol/liter). Your healthcare provider will probably request two to three separate measurements, ideally between 8 a.m. and 10 a.m.
Further lab work may be requested based on your testosterone levels, such as luteinizing hormone (LH) and follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH). These hormones can help isolate whether low testosterone levels result from pituitary or testicular dysfunction.
Final Thoughts On Free Testosterone Levels
Research into the effects of low free testosterone on other aspects of health is still ongoing. Low free testosterone levels and high LH may be associated with an increased risk for cardiovascular disease. However, low free testosterone levels were not linked to an increased risk for other diseases. Therefore, it is unclear whether low testosterone plays a causative role in cardiovascular disease or is a marker for another risk factor.
The rate of decline in blood testosterone levels is different in each man and depends on their overall health, history of chronic diseases, and medication use. To understand whether you have low testosterone levels, talk with a health professional at Invigor Medical to see whether your symptoms are consistent with low testosterone and whether you should have your total and free testosterone levels checked.By Mike Kocsis | 10 minutes read | Last updated: August 26, 2025 Categories: Hormone imbalance Testosterone
Medically Reviewed by Dr. George Touliatos
Male hypogonadism (low testosterone)
Male hypogonadism is a medical condition characterised by low levels of testosterone, which can significantly impact a man’s health and quality of life. This condition can be classified into two main types: primary and secondary hypogonadism.
Primary hypogonadism occurs when the testes themselves are unable to produce adequate testosterone.
In contrast, secondary hypogonadism is due to issues with the pituitary gland or hypothalamus, which are responsible for signalling the testes to produce testosterone.
It can affect men of all ages. A person can be born with hypogonadism or develop it later in life due to disease, infection, drug, or injury.
Delayed puberty is often a significant indicator of developmental abnormalities associated with hypogonadism. Hypogonadism affects both men and women.
Testosterone replacement therapy (TRT) is a common treatment for male hypogonadism.
TRT aims to restore normal testosterone levels and alleviate symptoms such as erectile dysfunction, low libido, and fatigue.
Understanding the causes and symptoms of male hypogonadism is crucial for proper diagnosis and treatment, ensuring that affected individuals can lead healthier, more fulfilling lives.
What are the male hypogonadism symptoms?
The symptoms of male hypogonadism largely depend on what life stage you developed the condition:
Hypogonadism signs during fetal development
If the body of a developing fetus produces insufficient testosterone, its external sex organs will experience impaired growth.
A male infant with male sex chromosomes (XY) may be born with an underdeveloped male sex organ, female sex organ, or ambiguous sex organ (that is neither female nor male).
Hypogonadism signs during puberty
Puberty is when your body matures and you begin the transition into adulthood. Delayed puberty is often a key sign in diagnosing various forms of hypogonadism, providing crucial insights into underlying hormonal imbalances.
If a boy develops male hypogonadism during puberty, he may experience the following symptoms.
- Breast enlargement
- Delayed puberty
- A failure of the voice change
- Excessive growth of limbs
- Poor growth of the penis
- Poor growth of facial hair
- Reduced muscle mass
- Reduced fertility
Hypogonadism signs during adulthood
In adulthood, male hypogonadism can disturb the normal reproductive system and masculine physical traits.
Adult men may experience the following symptoms after developing hypogonadism.
- Trouble getting and maintaining an erection
- Low sex drive
- Erectile dysfunction
- Poor sperm production or infertility
- Anxiety and depression
- Hot flashes
- Loss of facial and body hair
- Loss of bone mass
- Decrease in bone mineral density
- Gynecomastia (development of breast tissue)
Primary vs secondary hypogonadism
There are two types of hypogonadism: Primary and secondary hypogonadism.
Primary hypogonadism (testicular failure)
Primary hypogonadism occurs when the testes are unable to produce sufficient sex hormone testosterone due to a problem within the glands themselves.
It is also referred to as primary testicular failure.
Secondary hypogonadism (hypogonadotropic hypogonadism)
Secondary hypogonadism occurs when there is a problem with your hypothalamus or pituitary gland (parts of the brain that regulate testosterone production).
Your hypothalamus secretes gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH). This hormone tells the pituitary gland to release luteinizing hormone (LH) and follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH). LH tells the testes to form and release testosterone.
In men with secondary hypogonadism, either GnRH or LH and FSH are not produced enough, which makes the testes unable to produce testosterone.
Elevated prolactin levels should be measured as part of the hormonal evaluation to screen for possible pituitary adenomas, which can contribute to the condition.
Human chorionic gonadotropin can be used as a replacement therapy for luteinizing hormone to stimulate testosterone production and enhance fertility, with dosage adjustments based on hormone level monitoring and semen analysis.
What are the causes of hypogonadism?
The causes of primary and secondary hypogonadism differ from each other.
Causes of primary hypogonadism
Here are a few common causes of primary male hypogonadism.
Chemotherapy or radiation therapy: These treatments can have a negative impact on testosterone or sperm formation. They can cause permanent infertility.
Autoimmune disorders: Autoimmune disorders are conditions in which your body’s immune system, whose function is to attack foreign cells/particles, starts attacking the body’s own healthy cells by mistake.
Addison’s disease is an autoimmune disorder where your immune system attacks your adrenal gland’s cells.
When 90% of the adrenal gland gets damaged, it becomes unable to produce essential hormones like aldosterone and cortisol.
Sometimes, very long-chain fatty acids (VLCFA) accumulate in your adrenal cortex and testes, resulting in low testosterone synthesis.
Ageing: Reduction in circulating testosterone levels is a normal part of ageing. Data shows that over 30% of men older than 75 years have low testosterone levels.
Certain diseases: Hypoparathyroidism – It is an endocrine disease that is caused by mutations in several genes.
In this disease, parathyroid glands fail to produce enough parathyroid hormone; as a result, your blood calcium level rises. Hypoparathyroidism also influences the ability of the testicles to synthesise testosterone.
Liver and kidney diseases – These diseases increase the risk of primary hypogonadism in men. Data shows that 44% of men with renal failure have testosterone deficiency.
Testicle injury: Since testicles are present outside the abdomen, they can get injured due to an accident. Injury to one testicle does not cause hypogonadism, and you may still be able to produce enough testosterone. Damage to both testicles leads to hypogonadism.
Klinefelter syndrome: It is a genetic disorder in which boys are born with abnormal sex chromosomes. Instead of having normal male sex chromosomes (XY), individuals with Klinefelter syndrome have an additional X chromosome (XXY).
X and Y are sex chromosomes that determine gender. Men are XY, while females are XX. The presence of an extra X chromosome influences intellectual and physical development.
Undescended testicles: During fetal development, testes form inside the abdomen of the foetus. After birth, they drop into the scrotum, their normal place.
As the name of the disorder indicates, an undescended testicle is a condition whereby the testicles fail to move into the scrotum. It can be treated surgically, but when left unchecked, it can lead to male infertility or no testosterone production.
Hemochromatosis: If your blood has an abnormally high amount of iron in it, it can cause testicular failure, leading to no testosterone production.
Causes of secondary hypogonadism
Enlisted below are some common causes of secondary hypogonadism.
Pituitary disorder: Any pituitary disorder or pituitary gland dysfunction, such as a pituitary tumor, can reduce the production of pituitary hormones (LH and FSH) that control testosterone production.
The deficiency of pituitary hormones leads to testosterone deficiency.
People who have had testosterone surgery or therapy in their lives may also experience this problem. Pituitary disorders can significantly impact hormone release necessary for testicular function and testosterone production.
Obesity: Having an abnormally high body weight at any age can reduce free testosterone levels in your bloodstream.
Medication: Certain medications, like opioids containing pain medications, can decrease testosterone production.
Ageing: A decline in testosterone production is a natural ageing phenomenon. After age 30, about a 1 per cent reduction in total testosterone levels occurs per year in men.
Kallmann’s syndrome: It is the abnormal development of the hypothalamus that sends signals to the pituitary gland for the production of LH and FSH. This genetic disorder causes a delay or the absence of puberty.
Inflammatory illness: Some inflammatory diseases, such as tuberculosis and sarcoidosis,s affect the pituitary gland’s performance. Therefore, they can also contribute to low testosterone levels.
Hypogonadism diagnosis: How to know if you have hypogonadism?
Physical exam
Your doctor will ask you to describe your symptoms in detail. Based on your current health condition and described symptoms, they will perform a physical examination.
During the exam, they may analyse your breast size, muscle mass, penis growth, and the amount of body hair you have.
Blood tests
These blood tests are performed to check hormone levels in the blood.
It is important to understand that testosterone levels can sometimes fall within the normal range while other hormone levels may be abnormal, which requires a nuanced understanding for proper diagnosis and treatment of hypogonadism.
Your LH, FSH, and testosterone levels are measured. If your testosterone levels are low and LH and FSH levels are normal, you may have primary hypogonadism. On the other hand, if your LH and FSH levels are low, it may mean you have secondary hypogonadism.
These testosterone blood tests are typically performed in the morning because your hormone levels are highest at this time.
Imaging
Imaging tests like CT scans and MRIs are used to identify an abnormality in the pituitary gland. They show whether an individual has a pituitary tumour or not.
Semen analysis
Semen analysis does not directly determine whether you have hypogonadism. Instead, it’s used to build a more complete profile of your hormonal health.
Semen analysis measures the quantity and quality of sperm, so if the results are abnormal, it could suggest underlying hormonal issues like hypogonadism or low testosterone.
Hypogonadism treatment: How to treat hypogonadism in men?
Testosterone replacement therapy (TRT) is used to treat primary male hypogonadism.
The use of exogenous testosterone in TRT can effectively address symptoms of testosterone deficiency but may impair spermatogenesis, raising concerns about subsequent fertility outcomes.
TRT comes in different forms, such as:
Skin patches: They are applied to different body parts. Doctors recommend that their patients apply a skin patch every day.
Injections: Testosterone injections are usually given every 12 to 14 days. They come in multiple doses, strengths and formulations.
Testosterone enanthate is a long-acting injectable treatment option that can help stimulate androgen production and spermatogenesis.
Oral testosterone: Testosterone pills are another convenient TRT option that offer predictable absorption.
Testosterone gels: It is usually applied to the arms and upper back. Make sure you do not transfer it to others through skin-to-skin contact as medicated gels are typically flammable. Therefore, you should let it fully dry before you go near the fire.
Transdermal testosterone options like gels and creams provide consistent blood T levels and are another effective TRT method.
Pellets: Testosterone pellets have a size equal to a rice grain and are implanted under the skin.
They contain crystallised testosterone that is gradually released for up to a few months before a new pellet is implanted.
If your hypogonadism is due to a pituitary tumour, your doctor will recommend treatments that can remove or shrink the tumour. These treatments include:
- Medication
- Radiation
- Surgery
What are the benefits of testosterone replacement therapy (TRT)?
TRT aims to elevate your testosterone levels. It can reverse the effects of low testosterone levels. Millions of men have this treatment every year to restore their testosterone concentration in the blood and improve their quality of life.
Decreased lean body mass is a common outcome of testosterone deficiency, and TRT can help mitigate this issue among others.
Here are a few testosterone therapy benefits that people experience.
- It increases bone density and strengthens bones.
- It improves your sex drive.
- It helps you gain an erection.
- It improves your mood.
- It reduces body fat and helps you gain lean muscle mass.
- It may improve your memory and cognitive health.
TRT also has some side effects. Talk to your doctor about them to ensure you select the safest treatment plan.
Who should not have TRT?
Testosterone treatment is not for all. People suffering from the following problems should not have this treatment, as it can worsen their condition.
- Prostate cancer
- Breast cancer
- Severe sleep apnea
- Heart failure
- High red blood cell count
Additionally, there are potential risks of cardiovascular events associated with testosterone replacement therapy (TRT), as some studies have raised concerns about TRT increasing the risk of cardiovascular issues.
Untreated male hypogonadism can lead to several serious complications.
One of the most concerning problems is osteoporosis, a condition where bones become weak and brittle due to decreased bone density.
Men with hypogonadism may also experience a reduction in muscle mass and cognitive decline, affecting their overall quality of life.
Additionally, there is an increased risk of developing cardiovascular disease and prostate cancer.
Hormone-related disorders, such as erectile dysfunction, low libido, and infertility, are also common among men with hypogonadism. These conditions can significantly impact mental health, leading to anxiety and depression.
Can male hypogonadism be prevented?
There is no possible way to prevent hypogonadism that is caused by injury to the testes/pituitary gland or a genetic abnormality.
However, you can improve your lifestyle, regularly exercise, maintain a healthy body weight, eat a balanced diet and manage stress to naturally boost your testosterone levels.
How to treat hypogonadism naturally?
Though it’s not possible to treat hypogonadism naturally, but making healthy lifestyle changes can help you feel better or even increase testosterone to some extent.
Here are the positive lifestyle modifications that may help you increase testosterone and balance hormones naturally:
- Exercise regularly (cardiovascular and strength training)
- Reduce alcohol intake
- Avoid tobacco
- Maintain a healthy body weight
- Get quality sleep
- Manage your stress
Living with male hypogonadism
Living with male hypogonadism or androgen deficiency requires a comprehensive approach to manage symptoms and prevent complications.
Lifestyle modifications play a crucial role in this process.
Maintaining a healthy weight through regular exercise and a balanced diet can help manage symptoms and improve overall health.
Incorporating stress management techniques, such as meditation and yoga, can also alleviate symptoms of anxiety and depression.
Working closely with a healthcare provider is essential to developing a personalised treatment plan. This plan may include testosterone replacement therapy (TRT) or other medications to manage hormone levels.
Regular monitoring of testosterone levels, bone density, and other health parameters is crucial to ensure effective management of the condition.
With proper treatment and lifestyle modifications, men with hypogonadism can lead active and healthy lives.
It is important to stay informed and proactive about one’s health, seeking medical advice and support when needed.
FAQs about hypogonadism in males
Which medication is used to treat hypogonadism in males?
Different TRT medications like Kyzatrex, testosterone undecanoate, testosterone cypionate, and testosterone sustanon are used for testosterone hormone deficiencies.
Human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG) and clomiphene citrate may also be used for this health issue, especially if infertility is the main concern.
Can hypogonadism be treated?
Yes, hypogonadism can be treated mainly with hormone replacement therapy. Treating the underlying cause of this problem can help improve serum testosterone levels.
Can hypogonadism cause infertility?
Yes, hypogonadism causes infertility by lowering male reproductive hormone testosterone and sperm production.
How common is hypogonadism?
Studies show that around 40% of men over 45 and 50% of men over 80 have hypogonadism. Its risk increases with age.
Is hypogonadism genetic?
Yes, hypogonadism can be genetic.
What happens if hypogonadism is left untreated?
Untreated hypogonadism can lead to unpleasant low T symptoms, such as reduced muscle mass, weaker bones, low energy, poor cognitive function, low sperm count and sexual dysfunction.
Conclusion
Male hypogonadism is a chronic disease, and it requires life-long treatment.
If your hypogonadism is treatable, you should discuss it with your doctor to learn how you can reduce the symptoms of the illness and improve the quality of your life.
Click the contact button below to speak to one of our specialised TRT doctors and discuss your options!
References
De Silva, N.L., Papanikolaou, N., Grossmann, M., Antonio, L., Quinton, R., Anawalt, B.D. and Jayasena, C.N., 2024. Male hypogonadism: pathogenesis, diagnosis, and management. The Lancet Diabetes & Endocrinology, 12(10), pp.761-774.
Spaziani, M., Carlomagno, F., Tarantino, C., Angelini, F., Vincenzi, L. and Gianfrilli, D., 2023. New perspectives in functional hypogonadotropic hypogonadism: beyond late onset hypogonadism. Frontiers in Endocrinology, 14, p.1184530.
Jayasena, C.N., Anderson, R.A., Llahana, S., Barth, J.H., MacKenzie, F., Wilkes, S., Smith, N., Sooriakumaran, P., Minhas, S., Wu, F.C. and Tomlinson, J., 2022. Society for Endocrinology guidelines for testosterone replacement therapy in male hypogonadism. Clinical endocrinology, 96(2), pp.200-219.
Barber, T.M., Kyrou, I., Kaltsas, G., Grossman, A.B., Randeva, H.S. and Weickert, M.O., 2021. Mechanisms of central hypogonadism. International Journal of Molecular Sciences, 22(15), p.8217.
Evidence Based Research
This article has been researched and written based on scientific evidence and fact sheets that have then been crossed checked by our team of doctors and subject matter experts.
References, sources and studies used alongside our own in-house research have been cited below, most of which contain external clickable links to reviewed scientific paper that contain date stamped evidence.
Our team of healthcare experts and GMC registered doctors are licensed to UK GMC standards. We strive to provide you with the latest evidence based, researched articles that are unbiased, honest and provide you with accurate insights, statistics and helpful information on the discussed topic to ensure you gain a better understanding of the subject. You can read more about our Editorial Process by clicking here.
We value your feedback on our articles, if you have a well-researched paper you would like to share with us please contact us.
Quick Low Testosterone Test
If you know your total testosterone reading from a previous blood test input the results to the left above to see if your testosterone levels are normal.
Low Testosterone Levels
You may have low testosterone depending on the symptoms you have, please contact us to find out how we can help.
Please Retry
The Total Testosterone Level You Entered Is Incorrect. Figure Must be in nmol/L you can use our converter here.
Normal Testosterone Levels
Your testosterone levels appear to be in the normal range.
LOOKING GOOD!
You must be over 38, have had your ovaries removed or have suffered with premature menopause to warrant further hormone tests.
Further investigation needed
Please contact us to discuss your hormones, we need your total testosterone levels to validate your hormone deficiency. You can order a blood test here.
Low Testosterone Levels
You may have low testosterone depending on the symptoms you have, please contact us to find out how we can help.
High Testosterone Levels
You appear to have higher than normal testosterone levels, please contact us for further investigation.
Normal Testosterone Levels
You appear to have normal testosterone levels. Contact us if you have any concerns.What Is Male Menopause? (Andropause)
- Category: Primary Care
Understanding Andropause
For women, getting later in age is associated with mood swings and hot flashes—but do men go through similar hormonal changes? Yes; men go through andropause, which refers to the hormonal changes that men experience later in life. Here’s what you should know.
What Is Andropause?
Andropause refers to the symptoms men experience as their testosterone production levels decrease with age. After the age of 40, testosterone levels start to decline and the symptoms associated with andropause begin to manifest. Testosterone levels can also decline due to medications and lifestyle choices. Andropause is also more commonly clinically referred to as testosterone deficiency syndrome, androgen deficiency, and hypogonadism.
It is important to note that andropause is not the male equivalent to female menopause. Not only do men not lose the ability to reproduce completely, not all men experience it.
Signs and Symptoms
As you continue to age, it is normal for men to experience physical, sexual, and emotional changes as a result of a decline in testosterone production.
Some symptoms associated with low testosterone levels include:
- Low sex drive
- Fatigue
- Reduced muscle mass
- Irritability and mood swings
- Erectile dysfunction
- Depression
While the symptoms associated with andropause can seem overwhelming, you can manage your symptoms and their severity with the following tips:
- Eat a balanced diet, rich in essential vitamins and nutrients
- Get regular physical activity
- Get the recommended 7-9 hours of sleep
- Manage your stress levels
Because many of the symptoms associated with andropause can be tied to other health conditions, it is important to talk to your doctor to determine their cause.
Primary and Specialty Care in Henry County
At Henry County Hospital, we’ve been providing compassionate healthcare since 1919. When it comes to primary and specialty care, each patient can expect individualized care that meets their needs. From education to emotional support, we focus on your individual health and wellness.By Mike Kocsis | 7 minutes read | Last updated: May 21, 2025 Categories: Testosterone
Medically Reviewed by Dr. George Touliatos
Male menopause, a common term for andropause, is a gradual decline in testosterone with age. Mood changes, low libido, and fatigue are some of its most common symptoms.
It is also referred to as late-onset hypogonadism, testosterone deficiency, low testosterone, or androgen deficiency, as it manifests with similar symptoms to these conditions.
Some men may experience only mild symptoms, while others may have more pronounced effects that impact their quality of life.
Hormone replacement therapy (HRT) and lifestyle changes are among the treatments available, although they may not be suitable for all.
What exactly is male menopause?
Male menopause is not a medical term, but rather a common term used to describe symptoms associated with low testosterone levels in older men.
Unlike female menopause, which is marked by a clear biological endpoint (the cessation of menstruation), male menopause occurs gradually over time. It usually occurs between the ages of 40 and 60.
This decline in testosterone can result in a range of symptoms. The symptoms are often subtle and may develop slowly.
The following table highlights key differences between male and female menopause:
What are the signs of male menopause?
Male menopause can produce psychological, physical, reproductive and emotional symptoms in the body.
Some men may not be bothered by these low T symptoms if they are only mild, while others may notice a more prominent impact on the quality of their life.
Here are the most commonly reported male menopause symptoms:
- Low energy
- Lack of motivation
- Poor concentration
- Brain fog
- Irritability
- Loss of muscle mass
- Low bone mineral density
- Difficulty sleeping
- Low sex drive
- Erectile dysfunction
- Infertility
- Gynaecomastia
- Breast tenderness
- Fat accumulation
- Hot flashes
It is important to remember that these symptoms can be the result of your habits, stress, medications you are taking and many other factors.
So, discuss them with your doctor to rule out potential causes of low T and receive an accurate diagnosis.
So how long does male menopause last?
Male menopause is a gradual process that occurs over a period of several years.
Experts believe that men experience a 1% reduction in male hormone levels (testosterone) when they reach the age of 30. And this decline continues gradually throughout their lives
Unlike female menopause, it does not have a specific duration. It can vary from person to person.
The symptoms may start during middle age – around age 40 and continue into a man’s 60s or even longer.
What are the causes of male menopause?
Male menopause, or low testosterone, is a natural part of ageing. However, some men may experience more pronounced symptoms due to factors that accelerate or exacerbate the decline in testosterone production.
In addition to ageing, several other factors can contribute to testosterone deficiency, including:
- Certain health conditions or chronic diseases like obesity, type 2 diabetes, high blood pressure and heart diseases
- Poor lifestyle habits like poor diet, lack of physical activity, excessive alcohol consumption, smoking, and chronic stress
- Certain medications, such as antidepressants and opioids
- Psychological problems like stress, anxiety and depression
- Genetics
- Trauma or injury to the testicles (where testosterone hormone production occurs)
How to diagnose male menopause?
If you want to combat your male menopause and reverse the symptoms that you might be experiencing, then the first step is to diagnose the condition in the first place.
To start, your doctor simply needs to take a blood sample to test the amount of testosterone in your bloodstream.
This will give the doctor insight into what levels your testosterone is at.
A testosterone blood test is mostly done early in the morning when testosterone levels are highest.
If results show you have low testosterone, a second testosterone blood test may also be performed. It is done to ensure that the results are consistent, as testosterone levels can fluctuate throughout the day.
If low testosterone is confirmed, your doctor will perform a few other related tests to rule out potential causes.
How to treat male menopause?
Male menopause is often treated with lifestyle modifications or symptom-related treatment. For instance, if you are experiencing depression due to low testosterone, your doctor may prescribe antidepressants to treat it.
The most effective lifestyle changes that help manage these symptoms well are:
- Stress management
- Talking therapy
- Relaxation
- 7 to 9 hour of quality sleep
- Exercise
- Strength training
- A balanced, healthy diet consisting of testosterone boosting foods
- Weight management
- Regular check-ups
- Avoid excessive alcohol
For most men, these lifestyle changes do wonders, but for others they do not produce much difference. This is where treatments like testosterone replacement therapy (TRT) come to help.
Testosterone replacement therapy (TRT)
Testosterone replacement therapy (TRT) involves adding synthetic testosterone to the body to make up for the natural decline. In this way, it helps to restore normal testosterone levels.
There are various ways to administer testosterone, such as via injections, gels, creams, skin patches, and tablets.
TRT is an effective treatment that has helped countless men increase their testosterone levels. Yet doctors cannot prescribe it to anyone just because they have low testosterone.
Like any other medical procedure, TRT also has potential side effects like acne, weight gain and infertility. It is also linked to an increased risk of prostate cancer and breast cancer in some individuals.
Hence, your doctor will first evaluate your health condition thoroughly and then decide whether to give you testosterone or not.
Where to get help for male menopause?
Male menopause is a treatable problem, so it is best to get professional help and improve your life’s quality.
Balance My Hormones has been helping men boost their testosterone levels for several years now. Our hormone clinic provides various services, including testosterone blood test service, testosterone for men and hCG on TRT to help men tackle hormone problems.
Contact us today to book a free consultation and get professional help for low testosterone.
Can males have menopause?
Although men do not go through menopause like women, their testosterone hormone levels naturally decrease with age. This can lead to symptoms like fatigue, low libido, etc.
Can male menopause be treated?
Yes, you can treat this problem. Making healthy lifestyle changes is the best natural solution to low testosterone. If that does not work, testosterone replacement therapy is the other effective solution.
Does male menopause cause erectile dysfunction?
Erectile dysfunction (an inability to maintain or achieve an erection) has various causes, including stress, anxiety, etc. Male menopause can also contribute to it.
What age does male menopause start?
Male menopause is not a precise biological event like female menopause. So, it does not have a specific age of onset. But the gradual drop in testosterone levels may start showing its signs in the late 40s or early 50s.
Do all men need male menopause treatment?
No, not all ageing males need the treatment. If you are not experiencing significant symptoms or a noticeable decline in the quality of everyday life, treatment may not be necessary.
But if low T symptoms are impacting your mental, physical, emotional or physical health, getting treatment may be the right decision.
Can male menopause be reversed?
Since it is a natural part of ageing, it is not possible to fully reverse it. However, treatments like TRT can help you bring your testosterone levels back within normal range and improve your symptoms.
Summing it up
Male menopause is an age-related reduction in testosterone levels. It can cause increased tiredness, poor concentration, sexual dysfunction, mood swings, mental health issues, and muscle mass loss.
You should make healthy lifestyle changes to improve your symptoms and feel better again. If these do not work for you, replacing testosterone with TRT may be the right solution.
Discuss your symptoms, health condition and health goals with your doctor to identify the problem and find an effective solution.
References
Shivakumar, D. and Nagaraju, K., 2025. Male Menopause: Concern Needs Attention. Indian Journal of Pharmacy Practice, 18(2), pp.180-183.
Snyder, P., 2022. Testosterone treatment of late-onset hypogonadism–benefits and risks. Reviews in Endocrine and Metabolic Disorders, 23(6), pp.1151-1157.
Saalu, L.C. and Osinubi, A.A., 2022. Andropause (male menopause): valid concepts, fables and controversies. University of Lagos Journal of Basic Medical Sciences, 1(1).
Pines, A., 2011. Male menopause: is it a real clinical syndrome?. Climacteric, 14(1), pp.15-17.
Evidence Based Research
This article has been researched and written based on scientific evidence and fact sheets that have then been crossed checked by our team of doctors and subject matter experts.
References, sources and studies used alongside our own in-house research have been cited below, most of which contain external clickable links to reviewed scientific paper that contain date stamped evidence.
Our team of healthcare experts and GMC registered doctors are licensed to UK GMC standards. We strive to provide you with the latest evidence based, researched articles that are unbiased, honest and provide you with accurate insights, statistics and helpful information on the discussed topic to ensure you gain a better understanding of the subject. You can read more about our Editorial Process by clicking here.
We value your feedback on our articles, if you have a well-researched paper you would like to share with us please contact us.
Quick Low Testosterone Test
If you know your total testosterone reading from a previous blood test input the results to the left above to see if your testosterone levels are normal.
Low Testosterone Levels
You may have low testosterone depending on the symptoms you have, please contact us to find out how we can help.
Please Retry
The Total Testosterone Level You Entered Is Incorrect. Figure Must be in nmol/L you can use our converter here.
Normal Testosterone Levels
Your testosterone levels appear to be in the normal range.
LOOKING GOOD!
You must be over 38, have had your ovaries removed or have suffered with premature menopause to warrant further hormone tests.
Further investigation needed
Please contact us to discuss your hormones, we need your total testosterone levels to validate your hormone deficiency. You can order a blood test here.
Low Testosterone Levels
You may have low testosterone depending on the symptoms you have, please contact us to find out how we can help.
High Testosterone Levels
You appear to have higher than normal testosterone levels, please contact us for further investigation.
Normal Testosterone Levels
You appear to have normal testosterone levels. Contact us if you have any concerns.Our intricate system of hormones is an elegant and effective machine that we generally don’t pay any attention to – until it begins to break down. That’s where Testosterone Replacement Therapy comes into play. What Is Testosterone Replacement Therapy?
Each of the roughly 50 hormones our body’s rely upon to function and communicate is incredibly important. However, few are as important to male health and vitality than testosterone. Unfortunately, the average male’s testosterone levels in the United States has dropped by about 1% every year since the 1980’s – and it had already been falling for decades leading up to that point. Our collective testosterone nose-dive is associated with a rise in the prevalence of physical and psychological effects ranging from erectile dysfunction to depression. Indeed, any disruption in normal endocrine function has the ability to impact our health and wellness on every level.
Bringing your hormones (and your body) back into balance is now easier than ever before, and a skillful practitioner with the right tools can make all the difference in the world to your recovery process. Invigor Medical is leading the charge to make testosterone replacement therapy (TRT) accessible to anyone and everyone who is suffering from low-T, and we also seek to educate and empower our clients into making more healthful decisions that can enhance the effectiveness of TRT. Starting here, with this explanation of what testosterone replacement therapy is, the research behind it, potential side effects and contraindications of TRT, where to buy TRT online or in person, and more.
Table of Contents
What Is Testosterone Replacement Therapy?
Testosterone replacement therapy (just TRT for short) has become a commonly used treatment for men suffering from the unpleasant effects that come along with having inadequate levels of this hormone.
Low testosterone, or more specifically symptomatic hypogonadism, means that your levels of this androgenic hormone are so low that you likely have little or no sex drive, your erections are subpar (if they occur at all), energy levels aren’t what they used to be, you’re fatter and less muscular than you once were, and the list goes on and on unfortunately. When your levels of testosterone are low enough to disrupt your normal physiology, you can feel it. How exactly you may manifest the effects of low test will probably be unique to you – but if you are low, you will have more than a few hints.
TRT, when properly applied, has been proven help improve the quality of life of individuals at this level of hormonal dysfunction. It can bring back energy levels, libido, muscle mass, cognitive function, and bone density. These effects will only be enhanced if you are smart and stick to a lifestyle focused on building up your health – not breaking it down.
If you want to help support your testosterone levels and potentially enhance the beneficial effects of TRT, make sure to prioritize your sleep quality and consistency, eat real food with actual nutrients, and lift weights or exercise often. These are just a few things that the average male should do to support their testosterone levels, but they are the biggest rocks to focus on.
Testosterone replacement therapy creates improvements in overall health and vitality in men with low T by simply bringing them back up to a normal and sufficient range for a healthy male. This range is highly contested and finding a practitioner that will adjust your dosing and protocols based on your unique symptoms and blood work is important as well. Reference ranges speak to averages across a population.
Your test levels may need to be much higher than someone else before you are able to feel like yourself again. Everyone is different – especially when we are talking about hormones. Keeping an eye out for potential side effects forming is absolutely vital to the safe application of TRT. Although TRT is incredibly safe when used appropriately, there have been reported side effects from individuals taking their levels up to supraphysiological levels (way too high).
Testosterone Replacement Therapy Side Effects
Hormones hold tremendous power within the body.
This power is exactly why the reintroduction of testosterone, in therapeutic and physiologically reasonable doses, can have such profound benefits in men who don’t have enough. Fortunately, when administered in an appropriate manner, TRT is incredibly safe.
Although the research around TRT continues to evolve, it has becoming increasingly clear that it can be a game changer – and generally with a clear and obvious net-benefit. More recent research has refuted any concerns about cardiovascular health with TRT, and a neutral or actually favorable impact on cardiovascular disease risk is more likely.
With any hormone therapy however, there will be an adaptation to the introduction of exogenous (from outside the body) hormones. Injecting exogenous testosterone begins a cascade of hormonal events which will lead to your own endogenous (from inside the body) testosterone production being suppressed. This is an expected effect of TRT, but further side effects may include decreased sperm production, increased sebum secretion (zits!), changes in hair patterns, and most commonly, erythema and pruritus (redness and itching).
As long as you avoid taking supra-therapeutic doses of testosterone (which seem to be a poor choice for long term health), the potential pros clearly outweigh the potential cons.
Introduce excessive amounts of testosterone and you are almost certainly going to be converting a ton of excess test into estrogen through a process called aromatization. Too much estrogen means man-boobs (gynecomastia is a real thing), and an increased risk of obesity, among many other possible and unwanted effects. When blood panels are done and they are closely monitored, TRT has been consistently proven to reverse the increased adiposity (body fat), and improve many markers of physical and emotional wellbeing.
In fact, when testosterone levels are brought back up, many of the positive effects of having normally sufficient test levels can be expected to return. Results can only be expected though, if you get your TRT from an honest and official source. Businesses that can provide you with a guarantee for quality and efficacy has become increasingly difficult to find with the explosion of websites selling TRT online. To find one that can provide you with a safe and effective solution to low testosterone, it is important to look for a few things.
Where To Get TRT Online
Punching in a short google search will bring you an ocean of websites hocking discounted testosterone injections to men just seeking to add some muscle, lose some fat, and generally live better.
Unfortunately, these sites vastly outnumber the ones that are able to provide you with an actually effective TRT regimen. Any website that is clearly targeting bodybuilders or other populations who are seeking to enhance their test levels to supraphysiological levels should raise some red flags for you immediately.
Another thing to keep an eye out for is whether or not the website discloses both the upsides and potential downsides of Testosterone Replacement Therapy Online. There are real side effects possible when TRT is applied in a less than strategic manner. Testosterone can essentially be thought of as a medication, and with that comes a need for it to be prescribed by a qualified practitioner. Therefore, if you are buying TRT online and you are not required to speak with a qualified medical practitioner and be given a prescription – run away!
Currently, only a small percentage (around 5%) of websites selling medications online actually follow proper pharmaceutical guidelines. So the problem of poor quality testosterone seems more a reflection of the entire online industry being saturated with shady sales tactics and questionable sources.
Further than simply not following legal guidelines for medical prescriptions, the quality of the testosterone you are receiving is always going to be a concern when you are purchasing from a questionable website. If what you end up receiving is actually testosterone (oftentimes it will be whatever is cheapest, including a run-of-the-mill anabolic) it will likely be a subpar version.
As with anything that you are introducing into your body in order to influence physiological function, it is obviously important that you know exactly what you are putting in your body. It is also important that you are objectively monitoring the effects that it is having by getting periodic blood panels done and consistently meeting with a provider that is experienced with hormonal interventions.What is testosterone therapy?
Testosterone therapy is an important intervention for men with low testosterone levels. Learn more about signs and symptoms of low testosterone and therapy to treat it from Baylor Medicine urologist Dr. Blair Stocks.
What is testosterone?
Testosterone is the key male hormone that initiates and drives the development of male secondary sexual characteristics during puberty – like growth of facial hair and a deepening voice – and reproductive function.
“Testosterone levels peak at puberty. Over time, however, testosterone levels can naturally decline, leading to an array of clinical symptoms,” said Stocks, assistant professor in the Scott Department of Urology at Baylor.
When testosterone levels decline, males might experience symptoms like low energy levels, fatigue, low libido, problems with erectile function, loss of muscle mass and bone density and depressive symptoms. Someone who presents with these symptoms might have low testosterone, and testosterone therapy may be warranted. While most men diagnosed with idiopathic hypogonadism (or low testosterone) present in their 50s to 60s, younger men also can suffer from low testosterone levels and be symptomatic.
Formulation options
There are different ways in which one can take testosterone therapy. For exogenous testosterone, or obtained from an external source, the most common mechanism is injectable therapy. Patients typically inject themselves once a week and follow-up with their provider with regular visits and clinical lab monitoring.
Testosterone pellet therapy is another option. This procedure involves a small incision into the gluteal fat tissue. A provider will then inject a number of pellets into this tissue, which provides stable testosterone levels over a three-month period. This option is beneficial for those who are needle averse.
Oral forms of testosterone therapy also exist that are now safe for the liver. In the past, oral testosterone formulation was first processed by the liver, which could result in damage to the liver. Newer formulations are absorbed through the lymphatic system, thereby passing the liver. This is another good option for those who do not like needles. These are generally taken twice a day.
Testosterone gels or creams are a great option for first timers. These are applied daily on the outer arms, abdomen or inner thighs, however, if there is any risk of transference (e.g. interaction with children), patients should shy away from this option.
“Overall, we have a very patient-centered conversation to decide how to best deliver testosterone therapy,” Stocks said.
Side effects
Testosterone therapy provides positive benefits including:
- Improvements in mood and energy levels.
- Fighting daytime fatigue.
- Improvements in libido/sexual drive.
- Increased bone density and muscle mass.
- Loss of visceral fat tissue.
There are several physiologic side effects that should be closely monitored while a patient is on testosterone therapy. These include increases in blood pressure and hematocrit (or percentage of circulating red blood cells) and changes in cholesterol, which include lowering of good cholesterol (HDL) and increasing bad cholesterol (LDL).
“A major concern is that testosterone therapy will cause a heart attack or stroke,” Stocks said. “However, in 2023 the TRAVERSE trial was published in the New England Journal of Medicine that directly answered this question. In this large randomized control trial, the authors evaluated the cardiovascular safety of testosterone therapy in men aged 45 to 80 with hypogonadism and preexisting cardiovascular risk. Over a median follow-up of 22 months, testosterone therapy did not significantly increase the risk of major adverse cardiovascular events such as heart attack or stroke compared to placebo.”
Testosterone monotherapy brings the risk of infertility. When taking testosterone, the body sees no need to produce its own testosterone, thus the high levels of intratesticular testosterone required for sperm production are lost. Consequently, the production of sperm decreases, and a male can become subfertile or even infertile.
“There is a big counseling factor for younger patients with low testosterone interested in testosterone therapy, and we often explore other ways to increase testosterone,” he said.
Higher doses of testosterone can lead to transient acne while the body acclimates to new hormone levels, but this usually self-resolves over time. Hair loss also can be common.
Changes in mood are attributable to taking testosterone, which naturally gets converted to estrogen. Higher estrogen levels in males can lead to mood swings and irritability, so experts monitor this closely.
Overall, men with symptoms attributable to low testosterone levels should see a specialist trained in male hypogonadism.
“You should live a healthy lifestyle to see positive benefits of testosterone,” Stocks said. “Eat well, exercise regularly and follow up with your primary care doctor to make sure any other conditions are being treated.”
Learn more about Baylor Medicine Urology.
By Homa WarrenWhat Low Testosterone and Erectile Dysfunction Can Mean for Your Overall Health
For many men, erectile dysfunction (ED)will occur as they age. What many do not realize is that ED can often be linked to more serious conditions like cardiac issues, high blood pressure and diabetes. It is important for men to take these conditions seriously and seek further medical attention to screen for other underlying issues.
What is Low T?
Testosterone is an important male hormone that powers a man’s sex drive, reproductive abilities and even the development of muscle and bone. When testosterone levels get too low, men often suffer from a lower sex drive, decreased energy levels and/or feelings of moodiness.
Low T can be tied to a variety of medical conditions, including: autoimmune diseases, obesity, diabetes, metabolic disorders and heart failure.
What is ED?
ED can be the result of many factors and requires a comprehensive snapshot of the patient’s health to figure out. Most men have enough testosterone to maintain erections even after age 60, so ED cannot solely be attributed to Low T. ED can be caused by an abnormality affecting the main contributing factors needed for an erection: blood flow, nervous supply and hormones.
By reducing the risk factors for diabetes and heart disease, including lack of exercise, poor diet and smoking, men can help their chances of preventing ED.
How can I lower my risk?
If you are experiencing signs of Low T or ED, you should consult your physician to identify the root causes of these issues.
Learn more about urologist Eric Laborde, MD.This content was originally produced for audio. Certain elements such as tone, sound effects, and music, may not fully capture the intended experience in textual representation. Therefore, the following transcription has been modified for clarity. We recognize not everyone can access the audio podcast. However, for those who can, we encourage subscribing and listening to the original content for a more engaging and immersive experience.
All thoughts and opinions expressed by hosts and guests are their own and do not necessarily reflect the views held by the institutions with which they are affiliated.
Interviewer: You've been looking into or perhaps your physician has recommended testosterone therapy, but you're a little hesitant. That's because of the possibility of testicular shrinkage.
Urologist Dr. John Smith from University of Utah Health is here to help us better understand this particular side effect of testosterone therapy. Dr. Smith, first of all, how much of a concern is this to men?
Dr. Smith: I think it's a big enough concern for most guys they'll ask about it. I know it's not a concern for very many other people around these men, but it seems to be something that some men, I won't say all, but quite a few, it's something that is concerning for them.
Interviewer: Sure. So I suppose you get kind of a range. Some guys are like, "No way. I don't want to do therapy if shrinkage is going to be something that happens. That's not acceptable at all." And then there are probably some guys that think it's no big deal. Or is that not even the case?
Dr. Smith: No, it's true. I mean, a lot of people don't care. Older men who want to feel better, a lot of them, they're probably past childbearing age, or they're no longer on the train of it matters, and so they just say, "It's part of the game."
I mean, there are ways to mitigate it, which we can discuss, but yeah, overall, there are quite a few people who are concerned, and then there's a subset of people who are not.
Factors Influencing Testicular Shrinkage Concerns
Interviewer: Okay. So for those guys that are concerned, what's the general reason that you get? Is it just totally self-image, or are there other reasons?
Dr. Smith: I think there are probably quite a few. I mean, some of it is going to be self-image. Other ones are going to be it is your genitalia, which a lot of people have that makes them feel masculine. And so for some, it is an emasculating type of a thing where they look at it and they say, "My testicles are shrinking, which makes me less of a man," or whatnot.
And there are plenty of reasons I've had people give. But yeah, all the reasons are valid. I mean, these folks come in, and they're concerned, and so we try to discuss and alleviate their concerns.
Interviewer: Right. So are you any less of a man? I mean, you're only less of a man by the definition of men who have big testicles, right?
Dr. Smith: Sure. And based on the law of averages, if we based it on foot size, there'd be a lot of people who would probably fall under the average there, and people who would fall over the over.
To me, a lot of it is just personal choice and how people feel about themselves with it. And so that's really where it comes down to.
Interviewer: From a physiological standpoint, though, you're not any less of a man?
Dr. Smith: No. I mean, if you look at it and you're hypogonadal and you have lower testosterone, you could consider it from a hormonal perspective of you're making less than your body needs.
How Common Is Testicular Shrinkage for Individuals Who Are Using Testosterone Therapy?
Dr. Smith: It's very, very common. I would say it happens to almost everybody, and the reason is, is physiologically, your body is very smart. It's in tune. It knows what it's doing, and so there are hormones that your body produces that stimulate the testicles to produce testosterone and sperm because that's the testicle's job.
And so that production of testosterone and sperm, when you're giving exogenous testosterone via injection or topical or whatever the method is that you're replacing testosterone, you notice that there is no more feedback in that feedback loop to tell the body to stimulate for more testosterone because the body never gets low on testosterone.
So the body stops stimulating the testicles, and if you stop stimulating a factory to make the goods and services that it makes, you're going to have to lay workers off, and therefore you get the testicular shrinkage.
Usually, they shrink down to about half or a little bit less than half the size. Not less than half, but they shrink less than half of the size they are when you start.
Varying Levels of Testicular Shrinkage
Interviewer: Okay. Yeah, that was my next question. How much shrinkage can be expected? Is it pretty consistent that most guys are going to lose about half the size? Did I understand that correctly?
Dr. Smith: Yeah, a lot of the literature says around half. I mean, it's variable again. Some people lose less than that. I would say on average it's about half.
Interviewer: So if I'm understanding correctly, the shrinkage is going to occur just about in all individuals who undergo therapy?
Dr. Smith: Exactly.
Interviewer: Are there some factors that will make it more likely that somebody will have more shrinkage than somebody else?
Dr. Smith: Not that we've identified. And again, there are a few treatments that we use for testosterone therapy that don't affect testicular size.
Health Impacts of Testicular Shrinkage
Interviewer: And what about health impacts? Other than just physical shrinkage, are there health impacts? Any sort of long-term effects of testicular shrinkage?
Dr. Smith: It can affect and does affect sperm production as well. So in our younger patients who are desiring fertility later on, it's definitely a factor of something that we keep in mind. Otherwise, there's no physical impact.
Interviewer: Okay. And then what about changes to sexual function or libido? Is that associated directly with testicular shrinkage?
Dr. Smith: Not at all. If you have low testosterone, you're likely to have a lower libido, and then when you replace the testosterone, you're likely to have an increase in your libido. So it would be the opposite.
Interviewer: Yeah, so the size really doesn't matter.
Dr. Smith: No.
Interviewer: As far as that's concerned.
Dr. Smith: Exactly.
Minimizing Testicular Shrinkage
Interviewer: So you mentioned that there are some ways to minimize shrinkage impacts. The first question a lot of guys might have is, "Is that shrinkage going to be reversed if men discontinue testosterone therapy? Will the size come back?"
Dr. Smith: Yes, and in most cases, you'll see the size return. Not in all cases. I never guarantee that to patients because you never know what the body's going to do. Prior to starting testosterone therapy, if it's diagnosed the correct way and you have low testosterone, your body is already not making a sufficient quantity. And so it's not going to be able to go back to making a sufficient quantity if you were to stop testosterone therapy.
Interviewer: And then let's talk about specific treatments or strategies to minimize that risk of testicular shrinkage while on testosterone therapy. What are some of those?
Clomiphene
Dr. Smith: Sure. So one of the most common, or used to be very common, was an off-label medicine called clomiphene. Clomiphene is a drug that's used to stimulate the precursor hormones, LH and FSH that I mentioned previously. And those two hormones stimulate the testicles to make testosterone and sperm. And so, by using this medication, you're not actually shutting down the signals for production. You're actually increasing them.
Now, the contrast of "Will this give you larger testicles?" doesn't necessarily apply and doesn't usually happen. But that's one way to minimize testicular size loss.
Human Chorionic Gonadotropin (HCG)
There's also a medication that you can inject called HCG, or human chorionic gonadotropin. This is a precursor... or not a precursor. It's an LH analog, meaning that it acts just like LH even though it's not LH, and it stimulates the testicles to continue the production of sperm and testosterone.
That medication also will help to maintain testicular size, and so we'll utilize that sometimes in combination with testosterone injection therapy to maintain the size of the testicles.
Alternative Treatments and Over-the-Counter Options for Testicular Shrinkage
Interviewer: Are there some instances where those aren't things that can be done for a guy and it's just inevitable if you're on testosterone therapy that you're going to have size shrinkage?
Dr. Smith: Sure. I mean, during the pandemic that we just had, there was a shortage of a lot of these medications, so they were unavailable. And so if you wanted to maintain your testosterone therapy, you didn't have a choice to get HCG in some cases. Clomid was pretty available throughout, but there was a shortage of it for a short time and you just didn't have access to it. And if you wanted to maintain your testosterone therapy, you went without some of those medicines at times.
Interviewer: And what about other alternative treatments or therapies that can provide similar benefits to testosterone therapy without that risk of shrinkage? And I'm thinking maybe something you'd see a doctor for, or maybe something you'd get over the counter. How are those?
Dr. Smith: So a lot of the over-the-counter stuff you're going to see, none of those are regulated by the Food and Drug Association. So it's really hard for me to speak to those. I've had patients anecdotally tell me in the clinic, "Oh, I tried this supplement or that supplement. I felt like it really helped me."
But there are not a ton of other options. There are some other medications like DHEA and other ones that are precursors. I don't use them often just because there's not a super robust amount of data that's been convincing for me to use them in my practice.
Interviewer: You just don't feel comfortable recommending those to patients as a result of that, huh?
Dr. Smith: Right.
Beyond Testicular Shrinkage, Is Testosterone Therapy Right for You?
Interviewer: So if a guy is considering testosterone therapy, and has been properly diagnosed, and thinks it would be a benefit for them, and they just really are hung up on the size, the shrinkage thing, how do you talk with a man to help them maybe come to accept that a little bit more? Do you have any points of view that you can give them that they've found useful?
Dr. Smith: Yeah. I mean, I think a lot of the patients, if we're already past... Say I've got a patient who's in their 40s or 50s who is past the time where they want to have any further childbearing, I have those conversations with them of, "It doesn't really matter testicular-wise because the function of the testicles at this point is to make testosterone and sperm, and you don't need the sperm because you're not looking to have more kids, and it's already not making enough testosterone. So, in reality, who cares?"
And if they're there with their spouse, I usually will make a... not a joke, but I'll usually say, "And she doesn't care how big your testicles are," and they usually affirm that because nobody really cares how big they are. It's more of a personal thing.
And so the wife or the girlfriend or spouse or whoever's there usually looks around and goes, "Yeah, I don't care." In some cases it is reassuring to the individual as well because sometimes they think that their partner cares about that, and then to hear that it may not be an important factor in their relationship, it does give them at times some reassurance that, "Hey, who cares? It's not as big of a deal."
And so I try to reassure folks that way because those are just the facts of how it is. And also, "Hey, if you lose some of your testicular size, but you have a better libido, and you have better energy, isn't that worth it in the end?"
And so kind of having those conversations of, "Hey, the benefits are going to outweigh this little thing that you've got a hang-up on."
Interviewer: Right. So you just kind of have to let them work through it. Have you ever had patients that are just like, "Absolutely not. I can't do it"?
Dr. Smith: Oftentimes, if they're interested in testosterone therapy, they'll usually look for an addition of HCG to try to maintain that testicular size, and it's usually not a deal breaker for them in that regard. I've never had anybody come in and say, "Absolutely not. I would never do it because of the testicular size loss."
Interviewer: It sounds like most guys realize, "If this is a treatment that I need, the benefits are going to far outweigh the downside of some shrinkage."
Dr. Smith: Exactly. And I think that's very apparent when you see how a lot of these guys just start on therapy. They realize how good they feel. Their energy levels go up. They have an increase in their libido. For some of them, it helps erectile quality, and they look and they say, "Okay, this is much more beneficial than worrying about the testicular size."
updated: November 21, 2024
originally published: September 6, 2023
Lifestyle Changes That Can Increase Testosterone Levels in Older Men
Testosterone levels drop with age, but medication is not your only option. Urologist James Hotaling, MD, shares evidence-backed strategies that can help men boost their testosterone naturally.
The Connection Between Diabetes and Erectile Dysfunction
Believe it or not, erectile dysfunction can be a symptom of diabetes. In fact, half of men diagnosed with diabetes experience erectile dysfunction within 10 years of their diagnosis.
Know Your BPH Risk Factors
At some point in their lives, nearly all men will experience some degree of prostate enlargement. Understanding the risk factors can help you be proactive with your health and potentially...
Should You Worry About Swollen Testicles?
Understanding what a swollen testicle means and how to treat it can go a long way to easing the mind and fixing the problem.What’s the Cost of TRT at Defy Medical?
An estimated 40% of men have low Testosterone by the time they’re 45 or older.
Younger men are also increasingly experiencing low T because of health, lifestyle, and environmental factors.
Testosterone Replacement Therapy can replenish Testosterone levels over time, leading to symptom relief.
Every patient’s physiology is unique, so a quality TRT plan should be individualized. You may also require supplemental medication to help you feel your best. Because your TRT protocol can vary, prices will vary as well.
Read on to learn more about TRT and the costs associated with it.
Before we dive into cost, here are a few things to know about TRT.
The best TRT plan is based on your overall health and hormone levels, your needs and goals, and regular follow-up to keep you on track.
Primary Care physicians and urologists are often unfamiliar with TRT. They may not offer you the full range of available options, and their plans may not be customized enough to optimize your levels. They also may not have time to treat TRT patients due to the depth of care needed.
Some clinics offer a cookie-cutter TRT program for a flat monthly fee, but these plans don’t typically offer customization. It’s crucial to have a plan designed around your hormone levels, response to treatment, and needs. These clinics also might not offer supplemental medications that are necessary for best results.
Defy Medical patients know the cost of their treatment and pay for exactly what they need – and nothing they don’t.
So, what does TRT cost at Defy Medical?
Defy Medical’s cost for a male TRT patient on a Testosterone protocol that includes supplemental medication averages out to under $250 per month for the first year, and under $200 per month after that. This includes medications, lab work, and consultations.*
*This is a cost estimate based on the average TRT male patient experience. Your cost for care may be more or less depending on the severity of your deficiency as well as your symptoms, goals, medication dosages, delivery system(s), and auxiliary medications (if prescribed). This figure is meant for illustrative purposes and is not a price guarantee. Defy Medical does not charge a monthly fee and charges are due at the time that the service is purchased. Third-party financing is also available to qualifying Defy Medical patients. To learn more about costs and financing, talk to a Patient Advocate today.
No monthly fees – plus financing options available.
Defy Medical simply charges patients for the services and medications they need when they need them. We also offer access to financing for qualified patients if that works better for your budget.
Does insurance cover TRT?
Unfortunately, TRT and low T are often misunderstood and seldom covered by insurance.
Many traditional healthcare providers don’t consider men with significant low T symptoms to be candidates for TRT – even if blood testing shows lower levels. In fact, traditional providers sometimes require at least two blood test results showing low Testosterone prior to prescribing, and the window of what’s considered low is typically too narrow.
Many times, patients have to jump through hoops to even have Testosterone prescribed.
Insurance providers have a similarly narrow view of TRT. The majority of insurance providers will not cover the costs of a comprehensive TRT protocol because it is often not deemed essential.
If your provider does prescribe TRT and your insurance will cover it, the protocol likely won’t be individualized enough to replenish your low T levels.
It probably also won’t include ancillary medications that a lot of patients require to feel their best. This has been the experience of many Defy Medical patients who try a traditional health care provider and insurance prior to switching their care to us.
Defy Medical offers individualized protocols created by experts in Men’s Health, and we help our patients access a wide range of TRT options for greater customization.
Low Testosterone symptoms include:
- Low libido/sex drive
- Erectile dysfunction
- Lack of energy and fatigue
- Fat gain and difficulty building muscle
- Decreased stamina and strength
- Anxiety, depression, and trouble regulating mood
- Insomnia
Testosterone Replacement Therapy (TRT) replenishes your Testosterone levels, which can help alleviate low T symptoms so you can regain your passion and drive.
Change Your Life with Defy Medical
Tired of your low Testosterone symptoms? Ready to work with the experts to address your needs and put together a custom care plan, so you can get back to feeling great? Begin your care at Defy Medical today.
* denotes a required field.
Defy Medical: Your Men's Health Experts
When it comes to quality care, Defy Medical’s cost isn’t the only thing to consider.
Hormone balance is crucial to overall health. Your provider should be knowledgeable and up to date on best practices and the most effective delivery systems. Many Defy Medical patients seek our expertise after trying other clinics that offer basic programs which didn’t do enough, and sometimes make symptoms worse.
With Defy Medical, you access:
Convenient Telemedicine
Save time with virtual consultations and online ordering of medications (if prescribed).
Expert Care
Our care team specializes in Men’s Health and uses the latest research and advancements in TRT.
Individualized Care Plans
We go deeper to get to the root causes and create a protocol as unique as you are.
No Subscriptions or Contracts
You control your schedule and cost decisions, and only pay for what you need.
Extended 1-Hour Consults
You can ask questions, discuss your most pressing symptoms, address any concerns, and more.
Access to TRT Options
Your Defy provider will discuss TRT options including injections, creams, pellets, and more.
Access to Easy Pharmacy Ordering
Conveniently order prescriptions, supplements, and supplies through our online patient portal for direct-to-door delivery.
A Variety of Health Services
We also offer ED treatments, injectable nutrition, Primary Care, and more.What to Expect in Your First Week on TRT
The first week of Testosterone Replacement Therapy (TRT) varies based on the individual.
Every patient responds differently to treatment, and symptom relief and side effects depend on factors like age, dosage, protocol, severity of the Testosterone deficiency, and more.
That said, we’ll go over some general things many patients experience in their first week on TRT.
Your First TRT Dose
Using a new medication can take some getting used to. TRT comes in a variety of forms, including injections and topical creams.
Topical Testosterone is typically applied to the skin daily. A fraction of the Testosterone is absorbed through the skin, usually within 4 hours. It’s important to allow topical Testosterone to absorb completely, and to avoid transferring the cream or gel to family members and pets. Learn more about applying topical Testosterone.
Testosterone injections are usually administered once to twice a week. These injections can be subcutaneous, which means they are injected into the fatty layer of the skin. Testosterone shots can also be injected intramuscularly into various muscles. From there, the medicine absorbs into the bloodstream.
Testosterone injections also include something called an ester, which allows for a timed release of the medication that elevates Testosterone levels over 3-7 days (sometimes longer). Learn more about how to inject Testosterone.
It can feel awkward or unfamiliar to administer Testosterone for the first time. But once you get into the routine of it, it should become a quick and easy process. Be sure to follow all the guidelines from your pharmacy, and to reach out to your provider if you have any questions.
Defy Medical patients can contact [email protected] to go over their application instructions in-depth.
Potential Benefits in the First Week on TRT
During your first week, your body is just getting used to the new medication and increased Testosterone levels. Many of the benefits of TRT take weeks to months to fully appear.
However, there are some benefits you may experience in your first week. Keep in mind that your body is still adjusting, and that if you don’t see these benefits in the first week, they will likely come with time. Learn more about how long TRT takes to work.
Low Testosterone can cause fatigue, so increasing Testosterone levels often leads to more energy. This boost in energy may be caused by an increase in red blood cells, also known as erythropoiesis.
Testosterone affects mood by contributing to the uptake of serotonin, which is a crucial neurotransmitter responsible for feelings of happiness and contentment.
Testosterone contributes to sexual drive in both men and women, as well as performance in men. Increased Testosterone levels often strongly impact libido and sexual function.
Low Testosterone can lead to insomnia and sleeplessness. Bringing your levels into balance often leads to a better night’s sleep.
Testosterone impacts metabolic health and can lead to better glycemic control and improved insulin response, especially for patients with insulin sensitivity, prediabetes, or diabetes.
Potential Side Effects in the First Week on TRT
Just like other medications, you may experience side effects in your first week as you adjust to your new TRT protocol. We’ll break down some of the most common side effects below.
Testosterone impacts the production of sebum, or the oil that keeps the skin hydrated. When subcutaneous glands produce too much sebum, it can lead to clogged pores and breakouts.
This effect is typically temporary and will clear up as your body adjusts to the medication. If you continue to experience acne, you can also access acne treatments through Defy Medical.
These medications can be easily added to your TRT prescription order.
While your mood can improve on your first week of TRT, it’s also possible for your mood to feel inconsistent for a few weeks after starting TRT. Hormones play a big part in emotional regulation, and it may take some time for your system to adjust to higher Testosterone levels.
Testosterone triggers the body to retain fluid, which can lead to swelling in the ankles, feet, and other areas. This swelling typically isn’t anything to worry about, and it will likely clear up over time.
If you inject Testosterone, you may experience temporary swelling directly after your weekly or bi-weekly injection when your T levels are at their highest.
For most patients, TRT improves sleep and allows for more restful nights. But for patients with sleep apnea, TRT may worsen symptoms.
Sleep apnea is a condition where the airways become blocked while you sleep, leading to periods of time where you stop breathing. This reduces the amount of oxygen being taken in by the body and interrupts deeper, restorative sleep patterns.
Sleep apnea is a common cause of low Testosterone. If you’re experiencing sleep apnea symptoms, we recommend getting tested and diagnosed so that you can treat the issue.
Treatment typically includes a continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) machine, which you wear at night to improve airflow.
What to Expect In Your First Week of TRT With Defy Medical
We’ve covered the potential benefits and side effects you may experience in your first week on TRT.
When you partner with Defy Medical for your hormone care, you have access to more than a decade of expertise in the field of Men’s Health. Our telemedicine services allow you to consult with a provider from the comfort of your home, plus purchase your medications online (if prescribed) to ensure a seamless telehealth experience.
An individualized TRT plan that targets your symptoms is essential for achieving the best outcomes in Testosterone Replacement Therapy. Defy Medical is here to guide you through the first week and beyond.
Ready to learn more?
Get StartedGuiding and supporting you in your journey to optimal health and wellbeing
Beginning Testosterone Replacement Therapy (TRT) is a significant and empowering step towards improving your long-term health, energy levels, and overall quality of life. Low testosterone can affect everything from mood and motivation to sleep, focus, and physical performance. Restoring healthy hormone levels isn’t an overnight fix – your body needs time to respond and recalibrate. Achieving hormonal balance is a progressive process, one that requires expert oversight and ongoing adjustment.
At The Men’s Health Clinic, you’ll be supported every step of the way. Our experienced doctors provide expert guidance, regular monitoring, and personalised treatment plans tailored to your unique needs. With our support, you can feel confident navigating your TRT journey, knowing your care is in safe and trusted hands.
Browse:
Browse:
Longstanding low testosterone levels can manifest through a range of symptoms, including:
- Low mood, anxiety, or feelings of depersonalisation
- Brain fog and difficulty concentrating
- Persistent lethargy and reduced energy
- Decreased libido and erectile dysfunction
- Loss of lean muscle mass, increased body fat, and reduced bone mineral density
If you’re concerned you may be experiencing Testosterone Deficiency, the next step is to undergo diagnostic blood testing followed by a thorough consultation with a medical doctor.
Your initial blood test should be a comprehensive panel, as detailed in our article, Testosterone – Which Blood Test Do I Need & Why? Both our TRT COMPLETE and TRT COMPLETE PLUS blood panels provide extensive screening to identify potential causes, reversible factors, and any contraindications to therapy.
To confirm a diagnosis, two separate blood tests are required to demonstrate chronic low testosterone levels. If the first test reveals areas that can be improved, such as lifestyle or metabolic factors, it’s advisable to address these before repeating the test. If the second test confirms low levels and you are committed to making the necessary lifestyle changes with realistic expectations, Testosterone Replacement Therapy (TRT) can be life-changing.
It’s important to remember that Testosterone Deficiency should be a diagnosis of exclusion. Before considering TRT, focus on optimising stress management, sleep quality, nutrition, and physical activity. Achieving balance in these areas is crucial to experiencing the full benefits of healthy androgen levels.
Ideally, TRT should be a last resort. The therapy requires a commitment of time, effort, and finances, and it’s best approached after exhausting natural options. To support you on this journey, we’ve created helpful resources such as:
Testosterone Replacement Therapy (TRT) is designed to restore male androgen levels to a healthy, physiological range, supporting both physical and psychological wellbeing. Naturally, many patients begin treatment hoping for quick relief from the symptoms they’ve been struggling with. But low testosterone is often the end result of a more complex chain of events, influenced by lifestyle, stress, and long-term health behaviours. Addressing those underlying factors is just as important as correcting hormone levels. No one lives a perfect life, but progress comes from consistent effort, and effort leads to reward.
One of the common concerns about TRT is its predictability. Unlike the body’s own hormone production, medications have a more fixed effect. Human physiology, however, is dynamic – constantly adapting to internal and external stressors to maintain balance. That’s why our approach goes beyond simply prescribing a set dose. After careful titration based on how you feel and how your body responds, we provide ongoing support with structured follow-up, tracking both symptom improvement and key biomarkers. This ensures your therapy remains not only effective, but safe, sustainable, and tailored to your individual needs.
Traditional testosterone monotherapy suppresses the release of luteinising hormone (LH) and follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) from the pituitary gland – key signals required for healthy sperm production (spermatogenesis). This suppression can lead to reduced fertility or even infertility, which is often cited as a reason not to offer TRT to younger men.
At The Men’s Health Clinic, we routinely incorporate human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG) into our gold-standard TRT protocol. hCG mimics the action of LH, helping to maintain testicular function and support the brain–testes signalling pathway. In doing so, it not only helps preserve fertility, but also supports a more physiological approach to testosterone replacement. In fact, we’ve lost count of how many of our patients have successfully conceived while on therapy.
The benefits of hCG go well beyond fertility, too — something we explore in more detail in our article, The Benefits of Using HCG with TRT.
Hair loss can be distressing, but it’s important to understand that male pattern baldness is primarily genetic in origin. While medications like Finasteride – a 5-alpha reductase inhibitor – are often promoted as a solution, we advise against their use. Finasteride works by blocking the conversion of testosterone to dihydrotestosterone (DHT), a hormone essential for male health and optimal wellbeing. Suppressing DHT can lead to a range of troubling side effects, including sexual dysfunction, reduced libido, anxiety, and a general sense of emotional blunting, all of which may result from both low DHT and downstream effects on neurotransmitters such as GABA.
As a clinic that specialises in the diagnosis and treatment of testosterone deficiency, we have no bias against prescribing Finasteride – if the benefits truly outweighed the risks, it would be in our interest to recommend it. However, in our clinical experience, the risk of Post-Finasteride Syndrome (PFS) is very real and can be severely life-altering for those affected. We explore this in greater depth in our article, The Devastating Effects of Finasteride: Post-Finasteride Syndrome (PFS).
Those who dismiss PFS often misunderstand human physiology – or may have a financial incentive to downplay the risks.
Gynecomastia is the abnormal development of breast tissue in males. In both men and women, hormones like oestradiol, prolactin, progesterone, and IGF-1 play a key role in breast tissue growth. Fortunately, when TRT is properly prescribed and carefully balanced, gynecomastia remains a rare occurrence.
Although gynecomastia is benign, it can be understandably distressing due to its visible nature and psychological impact. In the context of TRT, it is most commonly associated with elevated oestradiol levels, which stimulate breast tissue growth. In contrast, both testosterone and dihydrotestosterone (DHT) act as natural inhibitors of this process. Raised prolactin may also contribute, typically as a result of oestradiol suppressing dopamine – also known as prolactin-inhibitory hormone – within the hypothalamus. Elevated oestradiol can also directly stimulate prolactin release from the pituitary gland.
Some individuals appear more predisposed to developing gynecomastia, particularly those with a history of anabolic steroid use, which can sensitise breast tissue over time. However, it’s important not to panic – the fibrous, more permanent stage of gynecomastia usually takes several months to develop. Early detection and appropriate clinical management are key.
If adjustments are needed to optimise your testosterone-to-oestradiol ratio, we’ll guide you through those changes. In cases where intervention is necessary, medical management typically involves Raloxifene, a selective estrogen receptor modulator (SERM) that has shown greater effectiveness than Tamoxifen for fibrous gynecomastia. In rare, persistent cases, surgical intervention may be the only definitive solution.
While acne has traditionally been linked to elevated levels of dihydrotestosterone (DHT), our clinical experience suggests that excess oestradiol is more often the underlying cause. In many cases, simply optimising the ratio of testosterone to oestradiol leads to significant improvement. Acne may occasionally appear during the early stages of therapy due to hormonal fluctuations, but this typically resolves as hormone levels stabilise.
To help minimise the risk of breakouts, we recommend staying well-hydrated and avoiding common dietary triggers such as chocolate and dairy, which may contribute to inflammation or increased oil production. From a skincare perspective, choose a soap or shower gel that is free from sodium lauryl ether sulfate (SLES), a common ingredient that can clog sebaceous glands and exacerbate acne.
With the right balance and supportive care, skin-related side effects are usually short-lived and manageable, and should not deter you from continuing with treatment that supports your overall health and wellbeing.
The relationship between Testosterone Replacement Therapy (TRT) and cardiovascular health is a complex topic, thoroughly explored in our article, Dispelling The Myths: TRT & Cardiovascular Health. At its core, TRT aims to restore male androgen levels to a normal physiological range, supporting the body’s natural functions and overall wellbeing.
Erythrocytosis – a rise in red blood cell count – is a known potential side effect of TRT, which is why we take careful precautions. To ensure your safety, we routinely monitor both blood pressure and haematocrit levels in all our patients undergoing testosterone therapy. This vigilant approach allows us to manage any risks early and maintain your cardiovascular health alongside hormone optimisation.
Preventing prostate disease is a priority for all men, not just those undergoing Testosterone Replacement Therapy (TRT). At The Men’s Health Clinic, we routinely monitor prostate health through regular Prostate Specific Antigen (PSA) blood tests. Additionally, for men over 40, we offer an optional annual prostate examination via digital rectal exam to provide comprehensive screening.
It’s important to understand that healthy hormone levels are unlikely to cause prostate cancer. Hormones act as chemical messengers, facilitating the normal function of their target tissues. Conversely, abnormal hormone levels can disrupt this balance and may be detrimental. This nuanced topic is explored in greater detail in our article, Dispelling the Myths: Prostate Cancer & Testosterone Replacement Therapy (TRT).
Our approach ensures you receive thorough, evidence-based care that prioritises your long-term prostate and overall health.
We understand that starting Testosterone Replacement Therapy (TRT) can feel daunting, but many patients are surprised at how straightforward and manageable it really is once they experience it firsthand. Until you’ve had your first injection in clinic, it’s hard to fully appreciate just how simple the process is.
Many men arrive feeling apprehensive, but after that initial injection, there’s often an audible sigh of relief. The treatment involves a tiny microdose of testosterone and hCG delivered subcutaneously with a very small insulin needle – and it’s essentially painless. The entire process usually takes less than two minutes to prepare and administer, about the same time it takes to boil the kettle for your morning coffee.
TRT quickly becomes a seamless part of your daily routine, much like brushing your teeth. There’s no need for added psychological stress or anxiety. In fact, many of our patients report at their annual reviews that they barely think about their injections anymore – instead, they’re focused on living their lives to the fullest.
If you are a suitable candidate for Testosterone Replacement Therapy, our gold-standard treatment involves either daily injections of Testosterone Cypionate or weekly injections of Testosterone Undecanoate, combined with daily Human Chorionic Gonadotropin (hCG). In our professional experience, this approach is the most effective way to achieve stable male androgen levels and significantly improve overall wellbeing.
Our prescribing rationale is detailed in the article, Microdosing TRT – The Future of Testosterone Replacement Therapy. hCG plays a vital role in preserving testicular function and fertility, among other benefits, which we discuss further in, The Benefits of Using HCG with TRT.
Your TRT journey begins with a comprehensive 60-minute consultation. During this appointment, we take a detailed medical history, perform a physical examination, discuss the benefits and risks of therapy, and jointly confirm that TRT is in your best interest. After you provide informed consent, you can begin treatment.
In the first two weeks, you may notice sudden mood changes, either positive or sometimes heightened anxiety. These effects stem from the initial hormonal fluctuations caused by starting hCG and testosterone. This is entirely normal as your body experiences peaks and troughs in hormone levels while adjusting. If you feel nothing, don’t worry – it does not mean the treatment isn’t working; your body may simply be adapting silently.
By this stage, your hormone levels should start to stabilise, and you may feel gradually better. Occasionally, some patients experience worsening symptoms, often because testosterone or oestradiol levels are not yet optimised. Elevated oestradiol, in particular, can cause anxiety and other symptoms.
This period is a normal part of your treatment – sometimes you feel worse before you feel better. We adjust your doses carefully based on how you feel and your blood test results, aiming to reach a healthy hormonal balance. Around Week 4, repeat blood tests help us assess your response, followed by a review at Week 5 where your dose may be modified to prevent potential side effects.
Some patients experience temporary water retention or bloating, often due to increased aldosterone activity early in treatment. This usually settles as your body recalibrates. Persistent bloating after Week 4 may indicate rising oestradiol, requiring further dose adjustments at Week 5 or Week 11.
The peaks and troughs of injections begin to smooth out as your hormone levels stabilise. However, your optimal dose may still require fine-tuning. Your body continuously strives for homeostasis, adapting both to your initial low testosterone state and the introduction of exogenous hormones. Achieving this balance takes time and careful management.
At around 10 weeks, we repeat blood tests to confirm your hormone levels have stabilised from a pharmacokinetic perspective. By this point, how you feel subjectively should align more closely with your lab results. During your Week 11 review, we assess your overall progress and, if appropriate, advise continuing your current protocol to maintain stable, healthy androgen levels.
Because everyone’s physiology is unique, further dose adjustments may sometimes be necessary to achieve the best possible results. Throughout this phase, it’s important to focus on sustainable lifestyle improvements, including stress management, sleep quality, nutrition, and exercise. Remember, low testosterone is rarely the sole factor in feeling “off” – achieving optimal health requires a holistic approach and ongoing commitment.
Pharmacokinetics explains that drug levels typically stabilise after about five half-lives – approximately 11 days for hCG and 4–8 weeks for testosterone. During this time, fluctuations in hormone levels are expected and can affect:
- Cardiovascular Function: Changes in heart rate, blood pressure, or extremity temperature
- Endocrine System: Increased thyroid activity, which may temporarily worsen cardiovascular symptoms or cause anxiety
- Mood: Testosterone, oestradiol, and DHT influence brain chemistry, impacting dopamine, serotonin, and other neurotransmitters
Your body needs time to adjust and restore hormonal balance. These early fluctuations are temporary and do not predict your long-term experience on TRT.
If your testosterone level is below the optimal range, your dose will be carefully increased to achieve healthy male androgen levels. Your body generally does not respond well to abrupt, dramatic changes – so after the initial boost, a gradual and steady approach is key. Aggressive dose changes can lower levels of sex hormone-binding globulin (SHBG), a crucial glycoprotein that acts as a buffer to help maintain a balanced ratio of oestradiol, testosterone, and dihydrotestosterone (DHT).
If your testosterone exceeds the physiological range, your dose will be reduced accordingly. While elevated testosterone can initially make you feel great by increasing dopamine levels, this is often temporary. Prolonged high dopamine leads to receptor downregulation, making the initial “high” unsustainable. Reducing testosterone will lower dopamine levels temporarily, which may cause an initial dip in mood, but this is a necessary step for your dopamine receptors to reset. Ultimately, this leads to a more stable and rewarding sense of well-being.
The enzyme aromatase, found in many tissues but particularly in the liver and fat, converts testosterone into oestradiol. Managing this conversion is essential for hormonal balance. Addressing underlying health issues – such as optimising liver function and reducing excess body fat – is fundamental. Additionally, lowering stress, improving sleep, eating a balanced diet, and appropriate supplementation all contribute to maintaining a healthy hormone ratio. For more detailed guidance, see our article: Controlling Oestrogen Without Pharmaceutical Drugs.
While oestrogen is important for overall health, excess levels can cause unwanted effects such as anxiety, emotional instability, water retention, breast tenderness, acne, and joint pain. In some cases, an aromatase inhibitor may be prescribed to reduce oestradiol production. Though initially developed for female breast cancer patients, these medications work by inhibiting aromatase and are used at doses roughly 75 times lower in men on TRT. All medications are prescribed under close medical supervision, using the minimum effective dose.
Patients often experience improved well-being as anxiety decreases and symptoms like water retention and breast issues resolve. However, reducing oestradiol can also lower serotonin levels, sometimes causing temporary mood dips before receptors adjust. Even if you feel well despite elevated oestrogen, you may find you feel significantly better once balanced.
An abnormal increase in red blood cell concentration (erythrocytosis) raises the risk of cardiovascular complications by thickening the blood, which can increase blood pressure and promote clotting. This topic is explored in detail in our article: TRT & Erythrocytosis – Facts and Recommendations.
Possible causes for raised haemoglobin and/or haematocrit include:
- Supraphysiological Testosterone Levels: Requiring dose adjustment
- Unmasking or Worsening of Obstructive Sleep Apnoea: If you notice increased snoring or poor sleep despite TRT, a sleep study may be recommended
- Dehydration During Blood Testing: It’s important to be well-hydrated even when fasting, as dehydration can skew results
- Delays in Blood Sample Processing: Which can cause inaccurate readings and necessitate repeat testing
If intervention is required to lower these levels, we will advise you appropriately. Importantly, you should not routinely donate blood while on TRT, as exogenous testosterone affects iron metabolism by suppressing hepcidin to varying degrees.
Sex Hormone Binding Globulin (SHBG) is a key glycoprotein that regulates the balance between oestradiol, testosterone, and DHT, impacting how these hormones affect your body and your sense of well-being. Our article: TRT, SHBG & Health – Facts, Questions and Evolution – provides an in-depth look at its role.
If your SHBG was low before starting TRT and rises during treatment, this often signals an optimised protocol and improved metabolic health — a positive outcome for both patient and clinician. However, if your SHBG remains low despite a well-balanced TRT regimen and lifestyle efforts (stress reduction, sleep, diet, exercise), it is likely a genetic trait. We encourage ongoing focus on improving metabolic health rather than fixating on SHBG levels.
We advise patients not to over-interpret their bloodwork independently — that’s what we’re here for, to provide expert, objective clinical guidance. While the internet may suggest lowering SHBG to “free up” testosterone, SHBG actually assists in delivering testosterone into cells for anabolic effects.
Remember, any dose adjustment causes a temporary “drug effect” — changes in physiology and possibly mood that do not reflect your stable state. Drug levels usually stabilise within 4–6 weeks after a dose change, at which point true effects become clearer. Never adjust your dose yourself. Dose changes are carefully managed based on pharmacology and physiology. Self-adjustment disrupts stable baselines and can cloud your perception of how well the therapy is working.
While Testosterone Replacement Therapy (TRT) won’t automatically make you a genius or drastically raise your IQ, it can significantly help clear that frustrating mental “fog.” Many men report improved memory, better focus, and a sharper ability to process new information. Tasks that once felt overwhelming – like remembering names or why you entered a room – become easier. TRT supports cognitive clarity, helping you confidently make everyday decisions without hesitation.
Male androgen levels play a critical role in normal brain function. Testosterone positively influences the amygdala, a brain region associated with reducing risk aversion, which may partly explain why men often take more risks. Both testosterone and oestradiol are active in key brain areas including the frontal cortex, striatum, thalamus, hypothalamus, hippocampus, and cerebellum. In short, hormones are essential for optimal brain health and mental performance.
Low libido and erectile dysfunction are common symptoms of Testosterone Deficiency, but it’s important to understand that reduced sexual desire isn’t always caused by low testosterone alone. From our clinical experience, TRT typically does not harm an already healthy libido—in fact, we often see libido improve before erectile function does.
The mechanisms behind libido and erection are complex and involve both physical and psychological factors. Usually, the psychological benefits of TRT—like increased confidence and mood improvements—precede physical improvements. Many men experience a rekindling of their former sexual vitality, though it’s natural that life’s stressors and increased responsibilities as we age will continue to influence libido.
Sexual desire and erections are largely driven by the parasympathetic nervous system (the “rest and digest” mode), rather than the sympathetic system (the “fight or flight” response). This makes sense evolutionarily: when there’s perceived danger, survival takes priority over sex, so libido naturally decreases in risky situations.
Contrary to common myths, testosterone is a calming hormone when balanced – it does not cause aggression. Most men on TRT report feeling calmer, more thoughtful, and emotionally balanced.
Imagine a seesaw balancing excitatory neurotransmitters and catabolic hormones on one side (linked to stress and stimulation) against inhibitory neurotransmitters and anabolic hormones on the other (linked to relaxation and repair). Testosterone primarily acts as a dopaminergic (stimulating) hormone, while oestradiol has serotonergic (calming) effects. Achieving the right balance between these hormones is key to emotional wellbeing – think of it as yin and yang working together.
Men’s motivation and reward systems are deeply connected to testosterone’s relationship with dopamine – the brain’s “feel good” neurotransmitter. Unfortunately, modern life often disrupts our natural physiological patterns. Historically, dopamine rewards were earned through physical activity and survival behaviors: wake up, hunt, catch food, then return to safety.
Today, many people seek quick, artificial dopamine hits through less healthy behaviors that do not require effort, choosing the “take” instead of the “earn” path. This often leads to reduced testosterone and diminished long-term wellbeing because your body isn’t “earning” its reward.
As physical beings, we need regular exercise to stimulate dopamine naturally, this is non-negotiable. Testosterone peaks in the morning, making this the ideal time for physical activity. Exercise then lowers testosterone slightly, which encourages behaviors to regain dopamine, often through food intake. Understanding this cycle can help you maintain balanced energy, motivation, and overall health.
As your doctor, one of the most challenging parts of my job is managing expectations. On paper, our role is straightforward: carefully adjust your TRT dosage to achieve healthy, stable male androgen levels based on how you respond. We provide expert advice on every aspect of TRT, but ultimately, we cannot do the work for you. The responsibility to improve your health lies with you – through better diet, managing stress, improving sleep, and committing to regular exercise.
Don’t let negative thoughts or doubts dictate your reality. Take control by understanding what you need to do rather than what you want to do in the moment. Growth and change often require stepping outside your comfort zone. The true reward comes from effort, not from passive or easy gains. If it were easy, it wouldn’t be nearly as meaningful.
While testosterone is a foundational hormone vital for both physical and psychological health, TRT is not a magic cure-all. Instead, it can be a powerful catalyst for positive change, but only if you put in the effort. Remember: effort equals reward.
Testosterone itself is not a simple “feel-good” hormone. Your body doesn’t respond to your current emotional state – it simply follows physiological processes. You must actively combat negativity, nurture positivity, and continually strive to “Earn Your Reward.”
Your prescribing clinician is your objective partner in this journey, equipped with the knowledge and clinical tools to make decisions in your best interests. Avoid comparing your personal experience with anecdotal stories on the internet. Trust the process and the expertise guiding your care.
Low testosterone is just one potential cause of symptoms like low mood, anxiety, brain fog, lethargy, and low libido. The list of possible causes is long. That’s why a holistic approach to your health is essential. Remember, there are no “days off” when it comes to improving your wellbeing.
Focus continuously on:
- Lifestyle: Managing stress and prioritising restorative sleep
- Nutrition: Making mindful, healthy food choices
- Physical Exercise: Which not only improves fitness but also enhances sleep quality and mental health
- Mindset: Cultivate resilience, patience, and a positive attitude towards challenges
Supporting your parasympathetic nervous system through practices like breathwork, mindfulness, yoga, ice baths, and grounding techniques can also help maintain balance and resilience.
Many patients who initially doubted the process later tell me – often between six months and eighteen months in – “You’ve changed my life, Doc!”
This journey requires patience, commitment, and a partnership built on trust and effort. Together, we can help you reach your healthiest self.
MBChB MRCGP Dip.FIPT
Speak to our team, book online or email us with any questions that you may have.Topical Testosterone: What Bases are Available?
Topical Testosterone is a popular form of Testosterone Replacement Therapy (TRT).
When you place a hormone cream on the skin and the medication is absorbed into the bloodstream, that’s known as transdermal absorption.
Typically, a small amount of the applied hormone reaches the blood, so dosages are created with this in mind. Topical Testosterone is also called a transdermal delivery system (TDS).
There are many types of topical Testosterone, including commercial and compounded options. These are made by taking Testosterone in its raw form and adding it to various creams, lotions, gels, and patches for topical application.
Each type of topical Testosterone has a different texture and appearance, but they are all designed to deliver the maximum amount of Testosterone possible to the skin.
When applied on a daily basis, topical Testosterone typically provides 24-hour duration of action. This naturally mimics the rise and fall of Testosterone levels throughout the day.
Types of Topical Testosterone/Transdermal Bases
Pharmacies usually carry a variety of topical Testosterone bases that can be used to make a transdermal hormone. Many pharmacies manufacture their own formulas and even make improvements to existing base formulas.
Here are common topical Testosterone bases used in transdermal hormone products, including Testosterone. Hormones like Estrogen and Progesterone are also available topically.
Lipoderm®
Lipoderm® is a transdermal cream base created by the compounding industry to maximize absorption. This deep-penetrating topical base is shown to effectively deliver hormones through the skin.
This formula does not separate when refrigerated, making it easier to use, and it has a creamy, non-sticky application for increased comfort.
Versabase®
Versabase® is a transdermal cream that also has cosmetic and moisturizing effects. This base typically works well for patients who like the benefits of lotion along with their topical hormone dose.
Versabase® is formulated to have a smooth, non-sticky application with fast absorption. It is non-irritating for most patients, hypoallergenic, and scentless. The base has been shown to mimic the skin’s natural moisture barrier.
HRT Cream Base
This versatile cream base is highly absorbent and designed to soften and moisturize skin. While it’s often used by female patients, men can also use this base.
The HRT cream is an oil-in-water emulsion, meaning it includes oil dispersed within the water base. This helps with its moisturizing effects.
This topical HRT base is designed in two formulations: heavy cream base and light cream base. The lighter formula works well when delivering one medication, while the heavy base work well for multiple hormones/medications.
Hydro-Alcohol Gel
This alcohol-based gel is designed to absorb quickly to limit transference.
Transference is something that can happen with most topical delivery systems. A family or friend may accidentally pick up the hormone cream from skin-to-skin contact.
It’s extremely important to avoid transference, both because it limits the effects of your TRT, and because it gives dosages to people who don’t need it.
An alcohol-based gel dries more quickly, making it an effective option for patients with children or other families/friends whom they want to avoid transferring to. The alcohol also solubilizes the skin (makes it more able to absorb the medication).
While there are many benefits, Hydro-Alcohol gel can potentially dry out and irritate the application site, especially if you have sensitive skin.
Transdermal Patches
Topical Testosterone can also be applied via transdermal patches that contain the medication.
Similar to a smoking cessation patch, these patches stay on your skin throughout the day and deliver the medication over time. Transdermal patches are only available as brand-name medications like Androderm®.
Many patients dislike patches because they can be uncomfortable, fail to stay on oily skin, peel away during activity, and stick to body hair.
Commercial Topical Testosterone: Androgel and Testim
There are brand name TRT medications available to men, as well. Androgel and Testim are two types of commercial topical medications.
These typically have a fixed concentration and utilize gel as the base. The percentage of Testosterone in these medications is typically less than compounded alternatives.
How Well Does Transdermal Testosterone Absorb?
Absorption varies from patient to patient.
According to compounding pharmacists, the average amount of absorption is 10%. So, roughly 10% of the total dosage of topically applied hormone will penetrate the skin.
This means that for every 100 mg of Testosterone applied, an estimated 10 mg will actually be absorbed. Depending on the individual, sometimes less is absorbed, and sometimes more.
This is why it’s important to follow up with your provider and regularly test your levels to ensure your protocol is optimized and working for you.
Learn more about how to improve topical Testosterone absorption.
Topical Testosterone Dosages
Men typically require 7 mg to 10 mg of Testosterone absorbed per day to optimize hormone levels.
To reach these levels, male patients often need their medication to be between 5% to 20% Testosterone. Five percent equals a 50 mg/ML concentration of Testosterone; 7% equals 70 mg/ML; 10% equals 100 mg/ML; and so on. The highest concentration available for most transdermal hormone creams and gels is 20%, or 200 mg/ML.
More than 20% concentration may result in poor distribution of the Testosterone, clumping of the ingredients, and reduced absorption of the medication.
Which Transdermal Base Should I Use?
The right transdermal base depends on many factors. That’s why it’s important to work with an experienced TRT provider who can explain your options and help you choose the best one for you.
For example, cream-based delivery systems apply better to skin in sensitive areas, such as the scrotum or inner thighs. Using an alcohol-based gel in these delicate areas can irritate the skin.
On the other hand, patients who don’t experience skin irritation may like the consistency and faster rate of absorption found in gels.
Containers for Topical Testosterone
There are different containers that can be used to dispense transdermal hormones.
- Topi-Click is a common dispensing container that looks like a deodorant container. The patient twists the dial at the bottom of the container to dispense a measured dose of transdermal hormone out of the opening at the top. One twist (click) of the dial typically equals 1/4 ML of medication. You can apply the Testosterone directly from the Topi-Click container, which helps avoid wasting or transferring the medication.
- Dispensing syringes are also commonly used for hormone gels and creams. Patients are provided pre-filled syringes (with no needle) that have the correct dosage inside. The hormone is dispensed by pressing the plunger.
- Plastic or glass jars are used to store Testosterone gels and creams, as well. The jar may come with a measuring spoon, or the patient can use their finger to apply an estimated amount of hormone.
- Other containers might be available depending on the pharmacy.
If the prescription does not request a specific type of container, then the pharmacy will usually default to one of the more commonly used containers.
Topical Testosterone Replacement Therapy at Defy Medical
Defy Medical provides hormone restoration to patients who are struggling from hormone imbalance. Our providers have more than 10 years of experience helping patients optimize their levels and lead happier, healthier lives.What TRT Labs Do I Need?
When starting Testosterone Replacement Therapy (TRT) or maintaining your treatment plan, it’s essential to understand the role of lab work.
TRT labs provide critical insights into how your body responds to therapy, allowing your medical team to personalize your treatment and ensure optimal results.
Whether you’re a current TRT patient or someone exploring this therapy for the first time, understanding which labs are required can empower you and your provider to make informed decisions.
In this blog, we’ll dive into the TRT labs you may need and why they matter.
Why Are Labs Important for TRT?
Testosterone Replacement Therapy isn’t a one-size-fits-all approach.
Each person has a unique hormonal profile, and the goal of TRT is to bring your Testosterone levels to a healthy range while minimizing side effects.
Regular lab testing helps monitor your progress and ensures that the treatment is working effectively.
Lab results provide valuable information about more than just your Testosterone levels. They also give insights into overall health markers, all of which can be influenced by TRT.
Your healthcare provider uses these results to adjust your dose, keep an eye on potential risks, and ensure that you’re benefiting from the therapy.
Initial TRT Labs: What to Expect Before Starting Therapy
Before beginning TRT, your provider will order a comprehensive set of labs to establish a baseline of your current health.
These baseline labs are essential to diagnosing low Testosterone and understanding how the treatment may affect your body.
Some common labs you can expect before starting TRT include:
Total Testosterone
Measures the total amount of Testosterone in your blood, both free and bound to proteins. Low total Testosterone is often the first indicator that you may need TRT.
Free Testosterone
This test measures the amount of Testosterone that’s not bound to proteins and is actively available for your body to use. Low free Testosterone can occur even when total Testosterone appears normal.
Sex Hormone Binding Globulin (SHBG)
SHBG is a protein that binds to Testosterone, making it unavailable for use. High levels of SHBG can lower the amount of active Testosterone in your system.
Estradiol Sensitive
Estrogen is considered a female hormone, but estradiol (the most common form of estrogen) is found in lesser quantities in the male body, as well.
However, too much estradiol can lead to negative effects including erectile dysfunction, infertility, and in severe cases gynecomastia (the development of male breast tissue).
Because men have such a low level of estradiol to begin with, we must use an Estradiol Sensitive test because it is more precise and able to closely detect estradiol levels.
Complete Blood Count (CBC)
TRT can increase red blood cell production, so a CBC test checks for elevated hematocrit and hemoglobin levels, which could lead to complications such as blood clots.
This test also screens for general health concerns.
Organ Function Tests
These tests check how well organs like the liver and kidneys are functioning. Since these organs are impacted by medication, it’s important to make sure they are healthy and to monitor how they’re processing your TRT treatment.
This includes tests like the Comprehensive Metabolic Panel (CMP).
Lipid Panel
This measures cholesterol levels and helps monitor heart health. TRT can affect cholesterol, so it’s important to check your lipid profile before starting treatment.
Thyroid Stimulating Hormone (TSH)
Checking TSH levels is a screening tool for potential thyroid disease. Because certain types of thyroid diseases can present similar symptoms to hypogonadism, it’s important to assess thyroid function.
Prostate Specific Antigen (PSA)
Testing for PSA can help assess prostate conditions like benign prostate enlargement, prostatitis, and prostate cancer development
Luteinizing Hormone (LH)
In men, this hormone is responsible for stimulating the production of Testosterone in the testes. LH also plays an important role in sperm production, which in turn plays an important role in fertility.
Because LH is produced relative to the amount of Testosterone in the blood, this measurement is another piece of the overall puzzle of Testosterone levels. Testing LH levels can also identify potential pituitary issues.
Insulin-Like Growth Factor (IGF-1)
An IGF-1 test can help evaluate pituitary function, as well as measure levels of human growth hormone (hGH).
DHEA-S
Dehydroepiandrosterone sulfate (DHEA-S) is a precursor hormone that converts into Testosterone and other hormones.
Monitoring DHEA-S levels can provide a more comprehensive understanding of your hormonal balance.
Monitoring TRT: Ongoing Lab Work
Ongoing bloodwork provides a clear picture of how your hormone levels are changing over time and helps your provider make necessary adjustments to your treatment.
By regularly measuring testosterone levels, we can confirm that they’re increasing to the desired range, which is key for achieving the benefits you’re looking for, like improved energy, muscle mass, and mood.
In addition to testosterone, it’s important to monitor other aspects of your health that could influence your response to TRT.
Thyroid function tests may be needed if you experience symptoms like fatigue or unexpected weight gain.
Since your thyroid hormones regulate your metabolism and energy levels, any imbalances can impact how well TRT works.
Over time, TRT can cause your body to produce too many red blood cells, leading to thickened blood.
Regular CBC tests help your provider track this and prevent issues such as high blood pressure or blood clots.
Elevated cortisol levels, often linked to chronic stress, can interfere with testosterone production. Keeping both testosterone and cortisol in check helps you get the most out of your therapy while supporting your well-being.
Specialized Labs for Individual Needs
Thyroid Function Tests
Your thyroid hormones play a role in regulating metabolism, mood, and energy levels.
If you’re experiencing fatigue or weight gain on TRT, your provider may order tests for thyroid function to rule out thyroid issues.
Cortisol Levels
Cortisol is a stress hormone that can interfere with Testosterone production.
If you’re dealing with chronic stress, it’s important to monitor Cortisol levels, as elevated Cortisol may reduce the effectiveness of TRT.
DHT
High levels of Dihydrotestosterone (DHT) can contribute to androgenic alopecia, a common type of hair thinning and baldness.
By identifying elevated DHT, this test can help determine if you may be at higher risk for hair loss and guide proactive treatment options.
How Often Should I Get Labs While on TRT?
The frequency of lab testing depends on your specific needs and how well you’re responding to TRT. Here’s a general guideline:
Initial phase
You’ll order your first set of labs prior to attending your consultation and beginning your TRT protocol.
Your first follow-up labs will typically be ordered three months after starting therapy.
This helps your provider determine if any early adjustments are necessary. It also helps you and your provider address potential side effects more quickly as your body gets used to treatment.
Ongoing monitoring
Once your treatment plan is stable, labs are generally checked every 6 months. However, if your provider needs to fine-tune your therapy, more frequent testing may be necessary.
Defy Medical offers tailored plans to help patients optimize their hormones and feel their best.
Can I Order TRT Labs on My Own?
At Defy Medical, we make it easy for current patients to order lab work for TRT, along with other important health markers.
While our care plans regularly check your levels to measure your progress, you can always order more labs on-demand as you see fit.
Ordering labs directly from your Patient Portal allows you to keep track of your progress on your own terms.
Regular lab testing is essential for ensuring the success and safety of your TRT treatment.
From diagnosing low Testosterone to monitoring your health during therapy, the right labs help your provider customize your treatment and catch any potential issues early.
By staying proactive with your lab work, you’ll be able to enjoy the full benefits of TRT
while minimizing side effects.
If you’re considering TRT or are a current patient looking to better understand your lab work,
contact Defy Medical today.
Our experienced team is here to guide you through every step of the process, helping you achieve
optimal health with a treatment plan designed specifically for you.Declining hormone levels are a natural part of aging for both men and women. While women experience a dramatic drop in estrogen and progesterone during menopause, sex hormone levels in men drop more slowly over time.
Some people call the phenomenon “manopause.” But according to Ali Dabaja, M.D., a urologist at Henry Ford Health, the actual term for waning hormone levels among men is “andropause.”
The Hallmark Signs Of Low Testosterone
Testosterone levels in men begin to dip about 1% each year after age 40. This slow drop means most men’s testosterone levels still fall within the normal range well into their 50s.
“We don’t usually test men for low testosterone levels unless they have symptoms or certain risk factors,” explains Dr. Dabaja. “Men who have HIV, or who underwent chemotherapy or radiation for cancer treatment may be at risk of low testosterone, so screening in these populations makes sense.”
In most cases, dips in testosterone levels don’t cause noticeable symptoms. When men do have symptoms, they can be similar to normal signs of aging, medication side effects, obesity or overweight. It can also be due to other medical conditions, like hypothyroidism (underactive thyroid) or diabetes.
Symptoms of low testosterone vary, but many of them are comparable to the symptoms women experience during menopause:
- Difficulty sleeping
- Loss of muscle mass
- Low bone mineral density
- Low energy
- Mood swings
- Poor memory and concentration
- Reduced sexual desire and sexual dysfunction
How And When To Test For Low Testosterone
If you have symptoms of low testosterone, your doctor will perform tests to confirm the diagnosis, including:
- A physical exam
- Blood tests to measure total testosterone level (usually before 10 a.m.)
- Hormone tests to diagnose the cause of low testosterone
- Additional testing to rule out other medical conditions
“If the patient’s testosterone level is consistently low, the next step is to pinpoint the cause,” Dr. Dabaja says. “Sometimes low testosterone happens because the testicles aren’t functioning to their fullest potential. Other times, the testes aren’t being stimulated with the proper hormones.”
Once doctors identify the cause, they can guide you toward the best treatment options. To ensure you get the most appropriate treatment, your doctor may refer you to a men’s health hormone specialist.
Treatments For Low Testosterone
If you’re diagnosed with low testosterone, you may be a candidate for testosterone replacement therapy (TRT). Like hormone replacement therapy for women, TRT can be delivered in a number of ways, including:
- Daily oral pills
- Transdermal gels, creams and patches
- Long- and short-acting injections
- Nasal spray
- Implantable testosterone pellets (placed in the hip or buttocks) with a three- or six-month supply of TRT
“The goal of treatment is to relieve symptoms by replacing lost testosterone,” Dr. Dabaja says. “But like any therapy, testosterone replacement comes with side effects and may not be appropriate for all men with low testosterone.”
People who have a history of male breast cancer or prostate cancer, and men who are at high risk of heart disease may need to have a conversation with a doctor to figure out if they are good candidates for TRT.
How To Best Navigate Andropause
TRT isn’t the only way to manage andropause. Implementing certain lifestyle changes can also help relieve symptoms.
“There are a lot of options patients can try before starting treatment,” Dr. Dabaja says. A few examples:
- Eat a balanced diet, including plenty of fiber and protein.
- Exercise, particularly weight-bearing exercise that focuses on building muscle mass.
- Maintain a healthy weight.
- Prioritize your mental health.
- See a specialist.
“There are urologists who specialize in men’s health, fertility and sexual medicine who can guide you toward different treatment options,” Dr. Dabaja says. “So if your primary care doctor isn’t familiar with treatment options, getting a referral to a specialist is really important.”
Reviewed by Dr. Ali Dabaja, a urologist who sees patients at Henry Ford Medical Center in Dearborn and at Henry Ford Hospital in Detroit.When Should Men Consider Testosterone Replacement Therapy (TRT)?
March 14, 2025 - Josh DavisFor all its reputation, testosterone plays a much bigger role in the body than one might think.
A type of sex hormone, testosterone indeed helps regulate libido and sexual function in men (and women, it should be added). But it's also responsible for maintaining muscle mass, bone density and fat distribution, and it can even affect your mental wellbeing.
Lots of things can affect testosterone levels, including lifestyle factors like diet, sleep, stress and weight. Age can too, as the glands responsible for regulating testosterone decline over time, along with certain medical conditions like diabetes and genetic disorders.
Whatever the cause, low levels of testosterone can not only result in a decline in sex drive and function, but can also contribute to a range of symptoms, including decreased muscle mass, weight gain, mood changes, fatigue and even osteoporosis (weakening of bone).
All told, nearly 40 percent of men over 45 and over half of men over 75 experience low testosterone, according to Dr. Akhil Muthigi, a urologist at Houston Methodist.
While in some cases low T can be treated with lifestyle changes, testosterone replacement therapy (TRT) can be an effective treatment option when healthy habits aren't enough. Dr. Muthigi discusses these treatment options, as well as the signs and symptoms of low T that he advises men shouldn't ignore.
What are the signs and symptoms of low testosterone in men?
Low testosterone is sometimes referred to as male hypogonadism, but they're actually two distinct diagnoses, according to Dr. Muthigi. Low testosterone is a specific diagnosis in which a man's total testosterone measures below 300 nanograms per deciliter (ng/dL), whereas a hypogonadism diagnosis consists of both a low testosterone result and specific clinical symptoms. Those may include:
- Low libido
- Low energy and depression
- Other changes in mood or cognition
- Anemia
- Fatigue
- Erectile dysfunction
- Male factor infertility
- Increased body fat
- Decreased muscle mass
- Breast tissue formation
In other words, it's possible that some men may experience low testosterone despite not having any of the hallmark symptoms associated with hypogonadism. Without a testosterone test, they wouldn't even know it was low.
What causes men to develop low testosterone or hypogonadism?
Until they reach their 30s, most men have fairly constant levels of testosterone, which is controlled by a complex system involving the testicles, the hypothalamus and pituitary gland in your brain.
As men age, their hypothalamus and pituitary gland function gradually decline, leading to lower production of testosterone from the testes, according to Dr. Muthigi. In fact, there is always an age-related decline with testosterone, he says, but the rate differs in every man, depending on their genetics and lifestyle.
Age, however, is but one of many possible causes of low testosterone and hypogonadism. In fact, there are many reasons why a man might experience symptoms associated with hypogonadism. Those most common, according to Dr. Muthigi, include:
- Certain infections, especially mumps
- Radiation therapy
- Injury or trauma to the testes, pituitary gland or adrenal glands
- Obesity and metabolic syndrome
- Certain medications such as chemotherapy drugs, steroids and opioids
- Excessive alcohol intake or smoking
- Certain chronic diseases such as diabetes, kidney failure or liver cirrhosis
- Certain genetic predispositions and mutations
How is low testosterone initially treated?
Depending on the cause and diagnosis, Dr. Muthigi treats low testosterone in a couple different ways, including lifestyle changes and medical supplementation.
"First, I first promote healthy lifestyle habits, all of which can naturally boost testosterone production," he says. "That includes regular exercise, both strength training and cardio; adequate sleep; stress management; a nutrient-rich diet high in protein; and weight loss if applicable."
In the event these practices fail to raise a patient's testosterone levels naturally, Dr. Muthigi says he then introduces the idea of external testosterone supplementation, or testosterone replacement therapy (TRT).
"In my practice and most other andrology-focused practices, if a patient meets the criteria of hypogonadism, I offer testosterone therapy as long as there are no contraindications that make it unsafe for them to take," Dr. Muthigi says. "Such conditions or factors may include a desire to maintain their current or future fertility, a recent heart attack or stroke, certain advanced prostate cancers that require hormone therapy, among others."
How does testosterone replacement therapy work?
"The andrology field has progressed tremendously just within the last decade, as there are newer FDA-approved testosterone formulations that are safe and efficient," says Dr. Muthigi. "There are several different forms of testosterone supplementation, including topical gels, nasal sprays, oral tablets and short- and long-acting injections, all of which have their pros and cons."
Testosterone gels and other external patches offer non-invasive ways to boost your testosterone, as the medication is absorbed through the skin barrier and into your bloodstream. However, it's important that the gel not come into contact with anyone else, as they might accidentally absorb it themselves.
Testosterone nasal spray also contains a type of gel but doesn't carry the risk of transference. Instead, the medication is applied into the nose and absorbed there through the nasal lining. However, it requires more frequent application than any of the other medications.
Injections of testosterone are also common and may be ideal for those who don't eat breakfast, have absorption issues or have personal concerns surrounding gels and transference.
Finally, there is oral testosterone, which over the decades underwent a rise, then fall in popularity, when those formulations were found to increase the risk of liver toxicity. Today, however, the newer oral formulations do not carry any of the associated livery toxicity concerns and is more readily absorbed, says Dr. Muthigi.
"The form of testosterone we ultimately decide upon involves shared decision-making with the patient based on their goals and preferences," says Dr. Muthigi.
What are the potential side effects of testosterone replacement therapy?
In 2015, the FDA announced that it would require drugmakers to issue a new warning label surrounding testosterone and cardiovascular safety. The agency cited certain studies that found testosterone therapy increased the risk of heart attack and stroke.
However, in February 2025, after reviewing a "large clinical trial," the FDA announced several label changes to testosterone drugs. Chief among them was the removal of the black box warning from all testosterone products that stated the drugs could lead to increased risk of cardiac events. Ultimately, the clinical trial published in the New England Journal of Medicine and cited by the FDA concluded that testosterone therapy did not increase cardiovascular risk.
"A growing body of recent evidence shows testosterone to be safe from cardiovascular standpoint," says Dr. Muthigi. "In fact, low testosterone and hypogonadism is associated with higher cardiovascular risk."
Erectile dysfunction is one such symptom of low testosterone that may also be an indicator of poor blood circulation caused by atherosclerosis, or narrowing of the arteries.
(Related: How Low T Affects Heart Disease Risk)
"There is also a growing body of evidence that demonstrates testosterone is safe to administer in men with prostate cancer or previously treated prostate cancer," Dr. Muthigi adds. "However, this must be managed and monitored by an andrology specialist."
Ultimately, like most medications, testosterone therapy is not without risk. The known risks include a decrease in fertility and sperm count; elevated blood counts (polycythemia), which can lead to blood clots if not monitored properly; acne; breast enlargement; and hot flashes.
Your personal risk, however, including the contraindications cited above, can vary and should be discussed further with an andrology specialist.
When to seek treatment for low testosterone
"If men harbor any of the hallmark symptoms of low T and hypogonadism, I advise they meet with an andrology specialist for a thorough history and physical exam and to have their testosterone levels checked," says Dr. Muthigi.
This will include a blood test taken in the morning between 7 and 9 a.m., during which your testosterone levels are typically the highest, along with a complete hormone lab workup if needed, he says.
(Related: 6 Signs to See a Men's Health Specialist)Interviewer: Testosterone therapy, generally speaking it's safe, but there are some side effects. What do you need to know? Why is it important to have a doctor part of your treatments and not just buying it off a TV ad? We'll talk about that next on the scope.
Announcer: Medical news and research from University of Utah physicians and specialists you can use for a happier healthier life. You're listening to The Scope.
What are the Risks of Testosterone Treatments?
Interviewer: If you're on testosterone treatments, it's important to be regularly monitored by a physician to avoid potential risk. Dr. Jim Hotaling is a urologist and a men's health expert at University of Utah Health Care.
So let's say I'm a man. I saw the TV ad for testosterone treatments and now I'm taking them. Are there some possible risks?
Sterility
Dr. Hotaling: I mean I think the biggest thing we see very frequently, and I define frequently as I probably see one to two guys a week with this, is that testosterone will make men sterile. It's actually been trialed as a male birth control. It only works on about 90, 95% of men. So it didn't actually make it as male birth control. But that's the biggest thing. It will drop your sperm count to zero in most instances.
Raised Red Blood Cell Count
The other issue is that it can raise your red blood cell count in some men to unsafe levels. Particularly the injections can do that. It can also cause fluid retention. Theoretically we used to think that it would increase your risk of prostate cancer. But there really isn't a lot of data to actually support that.
Increased Risk of Stroke or Heart Attack
And then there's been a lot of data about cardiovascular disease, testosterone and increasing the risk of stroke or heart attack. That really as it turns out, the major study that sort of showed that, which is a paper in a very prominent medical journal, has been shown to be methodologically flawed in a number of different things. And actually there's a lot of data that shows that men with testosterone actually do better from a cardiovascular disease standpoint.
I think generally speaking it's a very safe drug as long as things are monitored appropriately. We check labs on our patients every three to six months for the first year and then annually thereafter. Generally speaking we have very few, if any, adverse events from men being on it. So that in a nutshell are what the major concerns are.
Is Testosterone Treatment Dangerous?
Interviewer: So the people that are probably the target for the television commercials tend to be older. So they might not be concerned about their child rearing days are done. Are there dangers? I always understood that there just wasn't enough research to say whether or not it's safe at this point. And I hear a lot of comparisons to estrogen treatments in women.
Dr. Hotaling: Yeah, so there have been some huge trials done on estrogen treatments. One of the big issues is with that is increasing the risk of blood clots.
Testosterone treatments actually raises estrogen levels in men as well. And that can be an issue. That can get to an unsafe level especially in overweight men. Their fatty tissue has an enzyme in it that will convert testosterone to estradiol which is a female hormone and that can get to unsafe levels.
I think the big issue with testosterone is that we have patients who have been on testosterone for 5, 10, 15 years and we don't have follow up. We don't have the research to know what the exact effects are for being on it for that long. We think generally speaking it's very safe as long as it's used in a reasonable and measured fashion.
Importance of Speaking to your Doctor
Interviewer: So originally in this conversation I was going to take it in the direction of, somebody saw the ad on TV, they're getting the creams in the mail now and I was thinking it's a dangerous thing. But it sounds like you're saying it's not a dangerous thing.
Dr. Hotaling: I think if it's monitored appropriately and men are on it for the right reasons, I think it can make a big difference in their quality of life.
Interviewer: So if I was on it because of a TV ad, it's a good idea at some point to go to a urologist and have some labs done.
Dr. Hotaling: Yeah, definitely. We see a lot of people who are not really appropriately managed. There's a lot of these testosterone clinics that never see the patient and maybe have a phone interview and I think if men are on testosterone they need to see a physician regularly, have appropriate labs monitored, and know that it can make them sterile.
I would say no man of reproductive age who is planning on having children in the future should be on testosterone. There are alternatives that we can use that men have low testosterone and symptoms that are of reproductive age and can boost their testosterone and actually improve, not hurt their fertility.
Announcer: TheScopeRadio.com is University of Utah Health Sciences Radio. If you like what you heard, be sure to get our latest content by following us on Facebook. Just click on the Facebook icon at TheScopeRadio.com.
Lifestyle Changes That Can Increase Testosterone Levels in Older Men
Testosterone levels drop with age, but medication is not your only option. Urologist James Hotaling, MD, shares evidence-backed strategies that can help men boost their testosterone naturally.
The Connection Between Diabetes and Erectile Dysfunction
Believe it or not, erectile dysfunction can be a symptom of diabetes. In fact, half of men diagnosed with diabetes experience erectile dysfunction within 10 years of their diagnosis.
Know Your BPH Risk Factors
At some point in their lives, nearly all men will experience some degree of prostate enlargement. Understanding the risk factors can help you be proactive with your health and potentially...
Should You Worry About Swollen Testicles?
Understanding what a swollen testicle means and how to treat it can go a long way to easing the mind and fixing the problem.Why Address Late Onset Male Hypogonadism?
Hormone Replacement Therapy (HRT) is common practice for hormone deficiencies within the medical community as hormone optimisation can have a marked effect on the body as a whole, as hormones influence all cells within the body. It is widely accepted that normalisation of hormonal levels will improve your overall health and allow normal physiology to resume. This can be measured by quantitative and qualitative indicators.
It is common medical practice to offer females HRT when they suffer from symptoms and signs of ovarian failure before the normal expected age of the menopause. There is a defined point in their timeline when the ovaries fail and they are no longer fertile. We do however commence HRT before this defined point if females have symptoms and signs of oestrogen withdrawal without blood test analysis.
There are well established benefits offering patients experiencing hormone related symptoms and signs HRT up until the typical age of menopause. Females can also continue HRT after this period with informed consent if the benefits of continuing treatment outweigh the risks of stopping it. There is a level of autonomy placed into the patient’s decision to continue treatment with the agreement of the prescriber.
Males do not have a definitive cut off point where their testicles fail to produce Testosterone, instead they have a gradual decline in Testosterone production typically occurring after the age of 40. This can happen sooner due to Late Onset Male Hypogonadism. There are numerous reasons why this occurs but past history of Performance Enhancing Drugs (PEDs) usage is a major risk factor for this as it disrupts the normal physiological feedback mechanisms that control hormone production. Sometimes this decline is irreversible causing symptoms and signs of low Testosterone.
The Andropause is an underutilised term in UK medical practice. As males age their Testosterone levels gradually decline as the testes produce less Testosterone. An increase in Sex Hormone Binding Globulin (sHBG) decreases the amount of bioavailable Testosterone in the body, preventing it from being utilised by the cells.
Symptoms of low Testosterone include lethargy, low mood, loss of lean muscle mass, increased visceral body fat, decreased bone mass, decreased libido, erectile dysfunction.
The obvious benefits include increased energy, improved mood, increased lean muscle mass, decreased body fat, increased bone mass, improved sex drive and erectile function. These can be measured both in a qualitative and quantitative manner.
It seems counterintuitive that we prescribe HRT to females without laboratory confirmation of a quantitative reduction in Oestrogen levels but yet we do not routinely offer Testosterone Replacement Therapy (TRT) to men when we can actually identify a quantitative drop.
It is not a common practice in UK to perform a male hormone profile or to offer Testosterone replacement therapy. Late Onset Male Hypogonadism is a recognised medical condition and the British Society for Sexual Medicine has set out guidelines for its management.
Here at The Men’s Health Clinic, we will optimise your Testosterone levels to within normal physiological levels under medical supervision to enhance quality and quantity of life. Get in touch today.Why High Blood Pressure and Type 2 Diabetes Can Affect Your Sex Life
Men's health and chronic conditions
Preventing the development of ongoing conditions is ideal for your health. However, effectively managing existing chronic conditions is essential to prevent future complications. High blood pressure (hypertension) and Type 2 diabetes, as well as obesity, are common long-term conditions affecting men that can negatively impact sexual function. This article will review how these two conditions can contribute to erectile dysfunction and low libido (sex drive) in men, discuss potential treatment options, and offer prevention tips.
By understanding the connections, you can take steps to improve your health and get more out of life.
Risk factors: High blood pressure and diabetes
High blood pressure and Type 2 diabetes are risk factors for sexual dysfunction because they affect the blood vessels and nerves. High blood pressure can damage the blood vessels and impair blood flow, which is essential for achieving and maintaining an erection. In addition, it can affect the nerves that control the erection process, further contributing to erectile dysfunction.
Type 2 diabetes can cause damage to the nerves and blood vessels throughout the body due to consistently high blood sugar levels. This damage can lead to a condition called diabetic neuropathy, which may affect the nerves responsible for sexual function. Also, men with Type 2 diabetes often have lower testosterone levels, which may lead to low libido, or a decreased interest in sexual activity.
Signs and symptoms: Erectile dysfunction and low libido
Erectile dysfunction (ED) is the inability to achieve or maintain an erection sufficient for satisfactory sexual performance. It is a common issue among men, but its likelihood increases with age. ED can manifest in several ways, including:
- Difficulty achieving an erection
- Difficulty maintaining an erection
- Reduced sexual desire or low libido
Low libido can be both a symptom of ED and a separate issue. It is important to recognize these symptoms and discuss them with your healthcare professional to determine the underlying cause(s). They will help you pursue effective treatments.
Treatments
A variety of treatment options are available for ED and low libido related to high blood pressure and Type 2 diabetes, including:
Treating the underlying condition: Managing high blood pressure and Type 2 diabetes through medication, diet, and exercise can significantly improve sexual function.
Monitor your blood pressure and blood sugar levels: Enroll in the Ochsner Digital Medicine program to manage your blood pressure and blood sugar levels from the comfort of your home. You will work with your dedicated licensed clinician and a panel of professional health coaches to improve your high blood pressure, Type 2 diabetes or weight.
Medication: Oral medications can increase blood flow to the penis and improve erectile function. These include sildenafil (Viagra), tadalafil (Cialis), and vardenafil (Levitra). However, these medications may not be suitable for everyone, particularly those taking certain blood pressure medications or who have certain pre-existing health conditions.
Lifestyle changes: Maintaining a healthy weight, exercising regularly, quitting smoking, reducing alcohol intake, and reducing stress can all improve sexual function and overall health.
Psychological counseling: Sexual dysfunction can sometimes have psychological causes, such as stress, anxiety or depression. In such cases, counseling or therapy may be beneficial.
Testosterone replacement therapy: Testosterone replacement therapy may be considered if a low testosterone level is confirmed by a lab test and is suspected to be a major cause.
Prevention methods
Preventing high blood pressure and Type 2 diabetes reduces your risk of sexual health issues. Here's what you can do:
Maintain a healthy weight: Obesity is a significant risk factor for both high blood pressure and Type 2 diabetes. Eat a balanced diet and engage in regular physical activity.
Exercise regularly: Aim for at least 150 minutes of moderate-intensity aerobic exercise (cardio) or 75 minutes of vigorous-intensity aerobic exercise per week. It is even more beneficial to add a few sessions of resistance training (muscle-strengthening) per week.
Eat a balanced diet: Consume whole, unprocessed foods, such as fruits, vegetables, whole grains, lean proteins, and healthy fats. Limit your intake of processed foods, added sugars and saturated fats.
Limit or avoid alcohol consumption: Excessive alcohol intake can contribute to high blood pressure and Type 2 diabetes. Moderate alcohol consumption is defined as up to one drink per day for women and up to two drinks per day for men.
Don't smoke: Smoking is a significant risk factor for cardiovascular disease and can contribute to high blood pressure. If you smoke, consider seeking help to quit.
Reduce stress: Chronic stress can contribute to high blood pressure and poor overall health. Find healthy ways to cope with stress, such as practicing relaxation techniques, engaging in hobbies, or seeking support from friends and family.
Managing your condition
ED and low libido can greatly affect a man's quality of life. High blood pressure and Type 2 diabetes are common causes behind these sexual health issues. Recognizing the signs and symptoms, seeking appropriate treatment, and applying preventative measures can help men maintain a healthy and satisfying sex life. As with any health concern, it is crucial to consult with a healthcare professional for personalized advice and guidance.
Are you living with a common chronic condition? Enroll in the Ochsner Digital Medicine program to control and prevent further side effects of high blood pressure, Type 2 diabetes or weight. As a member of the program, you’ll have the support of professional health coaches and a licensed clinician. They will encourage you to stay up to date with annual screenings, manage your medications and provide lifestyle support. Easy digital tools allow you to take care of yourself at home—limiting extra trips to the clinic.
Digital Medicine helps you manage common chronic conditions. Learn more at Digital Medicine | Ochsner Health.4 Ways To Naturally Boost Testosterone | University of Utah Health
 

 

 
 
 
 

 
 

 

 

 
 
 Skip to main content
 
 
 

 

 

 
 
 

 

 
 
 
 

 

 

 

 
Main navigation
 
 

 

 

 
 Find a Doctor
 

 
 

 

 

 
 Locations
 

 
 

 

 

 
 Services
 

 
 

 

 

 
 Patients & Visitors
 
 

 
 

 

 
 

 

 

 
 

 Patient Services
 
 

 

 

 

 
 
Patient Services
 

 

 
 

 Questions About Your Bill?
 

 
 

 Urgent Care
 

 
 

 Where to Stay
 

 
 

 Patient & Family Services
 

 
 

 Visitor Policy
 

 
 

 COVID & Vaccine Information
 

 
 

 Clinical Trials
 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 
 

 University of Utah Hospital
 
 

 

 

 

 
 
Main navigation
 

 

 
 

 University of Utah Hospital
 

 
 

 Staying at the Hospital
 

 
 

 Parking & Valet
 

 
 

 Looking for Another Location?
 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 
 

 General Questions
 
 

 

 

 

 
 
Main navigation
 

 

 
 

 801-581-2668
 

 
 

 Find an Interpreter
 

 
 

 About U of U Health
 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 
 
 

 
 Billing & Insurance
 
 

 

 
 
 My
 Chart
 
 
 

 
 

 

 

 
 

 
 
 Search
 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 
 Menu
 
 

 

 

 
 Close
 

 
 

 
Service line menu
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 Find a Doctor
 

 

 

 
 Services
 

 

 

 
 Locations
 

 

 

 
 Patients & Visitors
 

 
 
 

 
 Patient Services
 

 
 
 

 
 Questions About Your Bill?
 

 

 

 
 Urgent Care
 

 

 

 
 Where to Stay
 

 

 

 
 Patient & Family Services
 

 

 

 
 Clinical Services
 

 

 

 
 COVID & Vaccine Information
 

 

 
 
 

 

 
 University of Utah Hospital
 

 
 
 

 
 University of Utah Hospital
 

 

 

 
 Staying at the Hospital
 

 

 

 
 Parking & Valet
 

 

 

 
 Looking for Another Location?
 

 

 
 
 

 

 
 General Questions
 

 
 
 

 
 801-581-2668
 

 

 

 
 Find an Interpreter
 

 

 

 
 About U of U Health
 

 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 

 
 Billing & Insurance
 

 

 

 
 MyChart
 

 

 
 

 

 
 
 Search
 
 

 

 
 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 

 

 
 
 

 

 

 
 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 
 

 
 
Breadcrumb
 
 
Health Care Home

 
The Scope

 
Health Library

 
All

 
2021

 
04

 
 

 

 
 

 

 

 
 

 

 
You are listening to Health Library:

 
4 Ways To Naturally Boost Testosterone

 

 
Apr 23, 2021

 
A healthy level of testosterone can lead to higher energy levels as well as an increase in strength and virility. But what are your options if you have low testosterone? On this Health Minute, Dr. James Hotaling, urologist and men’s health expert, shares four ways you can increase your testosterone levels without turning to hormone injections.

Learn more about this health topic in the full-length interview.

 

 

 
 
 Your browser does not support HTML5 audio.
 
 

 

 

 

 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 
 
 

 

 Download This Episode
 

 

 Subscribe on Your Podcast App
 

 

 

 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

 
 

 

 
Episode Transcript

 
Interviewer: Four ways to naturally boost testosterone. Dr. Jim Hotaling is a urologist and a men's health expert. What can I do?

Dr. Hotaling: Simple things you can do are work on losing weight. Even a 10- to 15-pound weight loss can make a big difference. Also, exercise, particularly anaerobic exercise, such as lifting weights. Eating a balanced diet, trying to avoid processed foods, particularly sugar. That can result in changing energy levels and also mess with the natural circadian rhythms that reflect your testosterone production. And the other big thing is sleep. A lot of men have sleep apnea and that can make a big difference in their natural testosterone production. Testosterone levels are a reflection of your overall health. And if you work on making these changes, you should notice a significant difference in two to three months.

updated: April 23, 2021

originally published: May 30, 2019

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 
More Episodes
 

 

 

 
 

 
Prostate Radiation with Fewer Visits and Fewer Side Effects

 
How to Tell the Difference Between Stress and Anxiety

 
How Pregnancy Affects Your Gums and Why Dental Care Is Essential

 
Keep Your Voice Strong and Healthy Every Day

 
Seven Questions for an Internal Medicine Doctor

 
Fluoride Is Essential for Kids' Developing Teeth

 
Why Doctors Recommend the Mediterranean Diet

 
Seven Questions for a Laryngologist

 
5 Health Concerns Associated with Gum Disease You May Not Know About

 
How to Safely Lower Your Cholesterol

 
 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 
 

 
Site Links
 
 

 
 

 About Us
 

 

 Academics & Research
 

 

 Billing
 

 

 Find an Interpreter
 

 

 Jobs
 

 

 Giving
 

 

 Maps & Directions
 

 

 Newsroom
 

 

 Referring Providers
 

 
 

 

 
 

 
Helpful Links
 
 

 
 

 Price Transparency
 

 

 Patient Rights & Responsibilities
 

 

 Patient Privacy
 

 

 Visitor Policy
 

 

 Disclaimer
 

 

 Website Privacy Notice
 

 

 DNV Public Information Policy
 

 

 Non-Discrimination Policy
 

 

 Surprise Billing Rights
 

 

 Webmaster
 

 
 

 

 
 

 
 
 

 

 
 
 
 

 

 50 North Medical Drive

 Salt Lake City, Utah
 84132
 

 
 
801-581-2121

 
 
 

 
 

 

 
 

 
 
 

 
 

 

 
 

 

 
 

 
 
 

Scheduling: 801-213-9500

En Español: 801-646-5914

 

 
 

 

 

 
 
 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 
Copyright © 2025 University of Utah HealthDivision of Urology, Women’s College Hospital & Sinai Health System, Department of Surgery, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada; 2
Division of Urology, Women’s College Hospital & Sinai Health
System, Department of Surgery, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada; 3
Scott Department of Urology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, United States; 4
Department of Pathology & Laboratory
Medicine, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada; 5
Division of Urology, Department of Surgery, University of Calgary, Calgary, AB, Canada; 6
Department of Urology, Dalhousie University, Halifax,
NS, Canada; 7
Division of Urology, Department of Surgery, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, MB, Canada; 8
Division of Endocrinology & Department of Urological Sciences, University of British Columbia,
Vancouver, BC, Canada; 9
Division of Urology, Women’s College Hospital & Sinai Health System, Department of Surgery, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada; 10Division of Urology, Department of
Surgery, University of Western Ontario, London, ON, Canada; 11Division of Urology, Department of Surgery, McGill University, Montreal, QC, Canada; 12Department of Urology, Harvard Medical School,
Boston, MA, United States

Cite as: Grober ED, Krakowsky Y, Khera M, et al Canadian Urological Association guideline on
testosterone deficiency in men: Evidence-based Q&A. Can Urol Assoc J 2021;15(5):E234-43.
http://dx.doi.org/10.5489/cuaj.7252
Published online February 23, 2021
Introduction
As part of their ongoing commitment to education and best
practice standards, the Canadian Urological Association
(CUA) solicited the creation of a clinical practice guideline
dedicated to testosterone deficiency (TD) in men.
Modern androgen therapy essentially began when testosterone was chemically synthesized in 1935.1
 This scientific
discovery (along with the discovery of other sex hormones
— estrogen and progesterone — was awarded the Nobel
Prize in Chemistry in 1939.2
 Throughout most of its history,
the concept of TD and replacement has been associated with
confusion and controversy. Concerns relating to prostate and
cardiovascular health, performance enhancement via steroid
abuse, and the perception that TD is simply part of the “normal” process of aging has resulted in reluctance of many
healthcare providers to diagnose and treat the condition.3
In 2013, a comprehensive Canada-wide needs assessment revealed that over 25% of Canadian physicians were
uncomfortable with the diagnosis and treatment of TD and
identified significant knowledge gaps related to patient management.4
 To address the knowledge gaps, the “Canadian
clinical practice guideline on the diagnosis and management of testosterone deficiency syndrome in adult males”
was published in the CMAJ.5 As part of its mandate, the
guideline was offered as a “living document,” to be updated
periodically in a perpetual effort to incorporate advances in
scientific and clinical discovery. The current CUA guideline
was approached in this spirit and serves as an educational
tool that builds upon existing knowledge and offers a contemporary update to the literature.
Methods
The current guideline is structured as a series of questions &
answers (Q&A) relating to the diagnosis and management of
TD. By way of this structure, the guideline offers a practical,
evidence-based overview and recommendations related to
the diagnosis, treatment, monitoring, risks, and benefits of
TD and testosterone therapy. It was designed to be a straightforward and user-friendly guide for specialists (urologists,
endocrinologists, psychiatrists, geriatricians), general practitioners, and the patients they treat. The guideline offers
Canadian-specific content with respect to knowledge and
attitudes related to TD, laboratory diagnostic testing, Health
Canada-approved treatment formulations, and funding considerations.
The authorship group represents a panel of Canadian and
international experts in the fields of men’s health and TD.
Representation is interprovincial and multidisciplinary, covering the fields of urology, internal medicine/endocrinology,
and clinical biochemistry.
Relevant publications on TD and testosterone therapy
were sought using a combination of Medline, EMBASE, the
Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials (CENTRAL)
and PubMed searches. The search strategy involved a series
of key words, including: testosterone deficiency, hypogonadism, low testosterone, androgen deficiency, andropause, and
testosterone replacement therapy. Filters included English
language, human studies, and an index date up to December
Ethan D. Grober, MD1
; Yonah Krakowsky, MD2
; Mohit Khera, MD3
; Daniel T. Holmes, MD4
; Jay C. Lee, MD5
;
John E. Grantmyre, MD6
; Premal Patel, MD7
; Richard A. Bebb, MD8
; Ryan Fitzpatrick, MD9
;
Jeffrey D. Campbell, MD10; Serge Carrier, MD11; Abraham Morgentaler, MD12
1
Division of Urology, Women’s College Hospital & Sinai Health System, Department of Surgery, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada; 2
Division of Urology, Women’s College Hospital & Sinai Health
System, Department of Surgery, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada; 3
Scott Department of Urology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, United States; 4
Department of Pathology & Laboratory
Medicine, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada; 5
Division of Urology, Department of Surgery, University of Calgary, Calgary, AB, Canada; 6
Department of Urology, Dalhousie University, Halifax,
NS, Canada; 7
Division of Urology, Department of Surgery, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, MB, Canada; 8
Division of Endocrinology & Department of Urological Sciences, University of British Columbia,
Vancouver, BC, Canada; 9
Division of Urology, Women’s College Hospital & Sinai Health System, Department of Surgery, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada; 10Division of Urology, Department of
Surgery, University of Western Ontario, London, ON, Canada; 11Division of Urology, Department of Surgery, McGill University, Montreal, QC, Canada; 12Department of Urology, Harvard Medical School,
Boston, MA, United States
Canadian Urological Association guideline on testosterone deficiency
in men: Evidence-based Q&A
CUA GUIDELINE
CUAJ • May 2021• Volume 15, Issue 5 E235
Guideline: Testosterone deficiency in men
1, 2020. Recently published guidelines from the Canadian
Men’s Health Foundation, American Urological Association,
The Endocrine Society, and the European Association of
Urology were included as supportive, summative content.5-9
Whenever possible, guideline statements and recommendations have been assigned levels of evidence (LE) based on
the GRADE Working Group framework (LE: high, moderate, low, very low quality of evidence).10 In brief, randomized controlled trials were initially rated as high-quality and
observational studies as low-quality evidence. Additionally,
the strength or importance of the recommendations was also
graded as either “strong” or “weak” based on the quantity,
quality, and consistency of the evidence available.
Following a systematic search, panel members were
asked to review the identified literature and existing guidelines to highlight areas appropriate for an evidence-based
review and update.11 Additionally, each member was surveyed and independently tasked to identify a series of fundamental questions relating to TD that should be addressed
or updated as part of the guideline (i.e., common questions
that colleagues ask each other, and patients ask their physicians). Submissions were collated and common themes
were identified. The proposed list of questions was collectively reviewed by panel members and finalized through consensus. Questions were assigned to each author based on
clinical expertise for an evidence-based answer. Responses
were collectively reviewed by all panel members for feedback, clarification, and consensus.
Evidenced-based Q&A
Practical overview
1. What is the definition of testosterone deficiency?
Testosterone deficiency (TD) is a clinical and biochemical
syndrome that may occur in men in association with advancing age; however, younger men with certain conditions
may also be affected. The condition is characterized by deficient testicular production of testosterone, with or without
changes in receptor sensitivity to androgens. It may affect
multiple organ systems and can result in significant health
consequences and a negative impact on quality of life.5,12
2. What is the prevalence of TD among Canadian men?
The prevalence of TD varies between populations and is
difficult to determine in the absence of widespread, routine
testing, which is currently not the standard of care. Current
studies evaluating the true prevalence of TD are conflicting
due to variable reporting measures, testosterone level cutoffs, and testing protocols. The crude Canadian prevalence
of biochemical TD is estimated to be approximately 25%
among men aged 40–62 years.13 The rate of TD increases
with age. Appreciating that prevalence rates will vary based
on case definitions and biochemical testosterone thresholds,
the prevalence of TD is estimated to be 4–12% in men aged
50–59 years, 9–23% in men aged 60–69 years, and 28–49%
in men over 70 years old.6,14,15
3. What are the common signs and symptoms of TD?
TD may present with a variety of clinical manifestations,
including sexual, cognitive, and physical/structural signs and
symptoms (Table 1). Common signs of TD include decreased
libido and vitality, sexual dysfunction, fatigue, and/or mood
changes.5,16 The signs and symptoms of TD are not exclusive
to this syndrome and are commonly associated with other
conditions related to male aging. As such, the clinical presentation should be correlated with biochemical confirmation
of low/equivocal serum testosterone levels.6
4. Why does TD occur?
Testosterone production primarily occurs in the Leydig
cells of the testis and is regulated by the hypothalamicpituitary-gonadal-axis (HPG) (Fig. 1).17 For normal testosterone production, gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH)
is released in a pulsatile manner from the hypothalamus.
GnRH stimulates the production and release of luteinizing
hormone (LH) and follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) from
the anterior pituitary. LH stimulates testosterone production
by the Leydig cells in the testis. The HPG axis is regulated by
a negative feedback loop whereby high levels of testosterone
send a feedback signal (via estradiol and testosterone) to
both the pituitary and the hypothalamus to inhibit ongoing
testosterone production.17 This pathway is essential for tesTable 1. Clinical manifestations of testosterone deficiency
Clinical manifestation
Sexual Decreased libido
Delayed ejaculation
Reduced ejaculate volume
Decreased intensity of orgasm
Erectile dysfunction
Loss of morning erections
Infertility
Cognitive/
psychological
Fatigue
Changes in mood
Depression
Insomnia
Poor concentration /memory
Irritable
Physical/
structural
Decreased vitality/energy
Anemia
Gynecomastia
Hot flushes
Decrease in muscle mass and strength
Increased visceral body fat
Decreased bone mineral density/osteopenia
Testicular atrophy
Loss of facial, axillary, and pubic hair
E236 CUAJ • May 2021• Volume 15, Issue 5
Grober et al
tosterone production and any disruptions can cause downstream effects and inhibit the production of testosterone.
Clinical TD results when the body fails to produce adequate levels of testosterone. If there is an intrinsic failure at
the level of the testis to produce testosterone, it is termed
primary hypogonadism. By contrast, if there is a hormonal/
gonadotropin signaling a problem within the brain (hypothalamus or pituitary), it is considered secondary hypogonadism.
Primary hypogonadism results in low levels of testosterone
but high levels of gonadotropins (LH, FSH). The brain is trying to amplify its signal to the testis to produce testosterone.
Secondary hypogonadism is a result of a neural signaling deficiency and clinically manifests with low levels of
testosterone and low or normal levels of gonadotropins. A
combined pattern of primary and secondary hypogonadism is common. TD or hypogonadism occurs as men age
due to several factors, including a decrease in Leydig cell
size, reduced Leydig cell sensitivity to LH, increases in systemic estrogen levels, and a diminution of GnRH pulsatility.18,19 Multiple medications and medical conditions are also
responsible for TD (Table 2).
Diagnosis
5. How best to establish the diagnosis of TD with history and physical
examination?
The diagnosis of TD is established through the collective
findings from history, physical examination, and serum testosterone measurements (moderate LE, strong recommendation). The clinical manifestations of TD are non-specific,
with recognized variability from patient to patient. Table 1
lists clinical signs and/or symptoms commonly associated
with TD and the medical history should be focused towards
identifying the cognitive, sexual, and physical/structural
manifestations of TD.5-7,9
Physical examination should be undertaken, with particular attention to the following testosterone-dependent tissues
and organs:
- Testicles (size, firmness, location)
- Penile development (length, location of urethral
opening)
- Prostate size and consistency by performing a digital
rectal examination (DRE)
Table 2. Causes of testosterone deficiency
Medications
or
substance
use
Opioids
Glucocorticoids (prednisone)
Chemotherapy
Anticonvulsants
Androgen deprivation therapy
Exogenous estrogen
Exogenous testosterone abuse
Marijuana
Alcohol abuse
Associated
conditions
Acquired Diabetes mellitus
Metabolic syndrome
Human immunodeficiency virus
Hyperprolactinemia
End-stage renal disease
Liver disease
Hemochromatosis
Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
Sleep apnea
Orchitis (mumps)
Sarcoidosis
Pituitary tumor/adenoma
Primary hypothyroidism
Genetic Kallman’s syndrome
Klinefelter syndrome
Congenital defect – anorchia, myotonic
dystrophy, cryptorchidism
Iatrogenic Radiation
Trauma
Nutritional deficiency
Excessive exercise
Fig. 1. Hypothalamic-pituitary-gonadal axis. GnRH: gonadotropin releasing
hormone; LH: luteinizing hormone.
CUAJ • May 2021• Volume 15, Issue 5 E237
Guideline: Testosterone deficiency in men
- Secondary sex characteristics: facial and body hair,
changes with puberty
- Breast tissue development (gynecomastia)
- Weight and fat distribution
- Muscle mass and bone structure/function
6. Are there valid screening questionnaires for TD? Are they helpful in
establishing the diagnosis?
Several validated screening questionnaires for TD exist, including the Androgen Deficiency in the Aging Male (ADAM),
Quantitative ADAM, Aging Males’ Symptoms Scale, and the
Massachusetts Male Aging Study Questionnaire, as well as
questionnaires that focus on a specific common element
of testosterone deficiency (i.e., erectile dysfunction [ED]),
including the International Index of Erectile Function, Sexual
Health Inventory for Men, and Erection Hardness Score.13,20-24
Due to their lack of specificity (approximately 20%),
screening questionnaires alone should not be substituted for a detailed history, physical examination, and biochemical testing when establishing the diagnosis of TD.6,9,25
Standardized questionnaires are often helpful for academic/
research purposes and can act as an initial screen to facilitate
discussion and highlight areas of focus for further evaluation
(low LE, weak recommendation).
7. What is the recommended laboratory test to diagnose TD?
Challenges have always existed in the quality of commercial
immunoassays to accurately measure testosterone relative
to validated reference methodologies, the gold standards
being equilibrium dialysis and mass spectrometry.26 The
development of the Centre for Disease Controls Hormone
Standardization (HoSt) program (https://www.cdc.gov/labstandards/hs_standardization.html) has forced many commercial immunoassay vendors to improve their calibration
and accuracy in the measurement of testosterone.27 Total
testosterone (morning draw: 7–11 am) remains the best
initial screening test to diagnose TD.5,6 Calculated free or
bioavailable testosterone based on age-dependant standards of total testosterone, sex hormone binding globulin
(SHBG), and albumin concentrations can be determined to
resolve equivocal total testosterone measures in symptomatic men5
(moderate LE, strong recommendation).
8. What is the biochemical level or cutoff to diagnose TD?
The clinical diagnosis of TD relies on the correlation of recognized signs and symptoms with biochemical confirmation
of deficient serum testosterone concentrations. Establishing
an absolute biochemical cutoff diagnostic for TD is challenging due to several factors: limitations in measurement
accuracy; laboratory and immunoassay variability; lack of
age-related reference standards; unknown baseline testosterone levels in individual patients; and variable target organ
receptor sensitivity to circulating testosterone concentrations.
Most clinician experts and previously published guidelines
would suggest that a total testosterone <10 nmol/L represents
a reasonable diagnostic threshold consistent for TD, while
appreciating that some patients may manifest symptoms of
TD at higher levels.5,6,12 Testosterone measures can be used
as a complimentary tool (as opposed to an absolute or diagnostic one) to support the diagnosis of TD in the context of
characteristic signs and symptoms identified by way of a
detailed clinical evaluation (low LE, weak recommendation).
9. Besides measuring testosterone, what adjunctive laboratory testing is
indicated?
In patients with established TD, clinicians should measure
serum LH levels to help classify the TD as primary (high LH)
or secondary (low/normal LH).5,6,12
Serum prolactin levels should be measured in patients
suspected of having secondary TD (low testosterone levels
combined with low or low/normal LH levels). Patients with
persistently high prolactin levels of unknown etiology should
undergo evaluation for endocrine disorders and to rule out
a prolactinoma.6
Serum estradiol should be measured in testosterone-deficient patients who present with breast symptoms or gynecomastia prior to the commencement of testosterone therapy6
(moderate LE, strong recommendation).
10. What are potentially reversible causes of TD that physicians should
consider?
Prior to initiating testosterone therapy, physicians should
consider and manage any potentially reversible causes of
TD5 (moderate LE, strong recommendation). These may
include:
- Acute illness
- Obesity
- Medication use (i.e., opioids, glucocorticoids)
- Extreme nutritional deficiencies and anorexia
- Extreme exercise
- Sleep apnea
- Hyperprolactinemia
- Hemochromatosis
- Hypothalamic and pituitary disorders (surgery, trauma, radiation, infiltrative disorders)
Following treatment or stabilization of these conditions,
reassessment of serum testosterone levels and the signs and
symptoms of TD is recommended.
11. What are the common comorbid conditions associated with TD?
TD is associated with several specific health conditions that
may prompt investigation and management of serum testosterone levels to validate such associations and compliment
the management of such conditions.5,7
- Type 2 diabetes and insulin resistance
- Metabolic syndrome
E238 CUAJ • May 2021• Volume 15, Issue 5
Grober et al
- Obesity
- Osteopenia/osteoporosis
- Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD)
- Sleep apnea
- Human immunodeficiency virus/acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (HIV/AIDS)
Treatment
12. What are the goals and benefits of testosterone therapy?
The primary goals of testosterone therapy are to mitigate the
negative signs and symptoms of TD and improve quality of life
while achieving eugonadal (normal) levels of testosterone.5
The benefits of treatment will vary according to the symptom complex of each patient. The Testosterone Trials — the
largest placebo-controlled, double-blinded, multicenter,
randomized controlled trial of testosterone therapy in symptomatic hypogonadal older men — demonstrated significant
improvements in sexual activity, sexual desire, erectile function, mood and depressive symptoms, anemia, and bone mineral density among men receiving testosterone therapy.28,29
13. What are the current treatment options for TD in Canada?
Table 3 summarizes the testosterone treatment formulations
currently approved by Health Canada.
Compounded testosterone products are available at many
compounding and online pharmacies in Canada, however,
published data has demonstrated significant variability of
testosterone concentrations within such products, leading
to concerns regarding efficacy and safety.30
The choice of testosterone therapy and route of administration should be a topic of discussion between the physician and the patient using a shared decision-making
approach. Factors influencing this choice include safety,
efficacy, tolerability, availability, preference, and cost/insurance coverage.
14. What is the recommended approach to treating a patient with characteristic
symptoms of TD with a “normal” testosterone level?
Patients may present with a clinical picture consistent with
TD but with serum testosterone concentrations within the
“normal” reference range. Efforts should be made to rule
out conditions with an overlapping symptom complex (i.e.,
depression, hypothyroidism, sleep disorders).
Challenges in the measurement of serum testosterone,
inconsistent normal reference ranges between laboratories,
the lack of a “baseline” reference level of testosterone earlier in a man’s life, variable androgen receptor sensitivity
to a given concentration of testosterone, and the ability of
elevated SHBG levels to effectively neutralize circulating
testosterone may account for a symptomatic presentation
with normal total serum testosterone levels. In equivocal
cases, measurement of SHBG and calculation of free and/
or bioavailable testosterone may provide additional insight
upon which to better interpret testosterone concentrations
and rationalize treatment.7,27,31
Recognizing such limitations, a supervised trial of testosterone therapy (three months) with close monitoring of both
the symptomatic and biochemical response to treatment is
recommended5 (low LE, weak recommendation).
Table 3. Testosterone treatment formulations currently approved by Health Canada
Generic name Trade name Dosage Comments
Injectables
Testosterone
Enanthate
Testosterone
Cypionate
Delatestryl
Depotestosterone
100–200 mg every 1–4 weeks
200 mg every 2 weeks or
100 mg weekly
– Cost-effective
– Typically delivered intramuscularly (IM) into large muscle,
including the thigh or gluteal. May require regular clinic visits
– Wide fluctuations in testosterone levels requires mid-cycle
testosterone monitoring
– Higher risk for polycythemia
Oral medication
Testosterone
Undecanoate
Andriol 40 mg capsules
Initial dose of 120–160 mg per
day in 2 divided doses
– Absorption enhanced with fat-rich diet
– Short half-life requires multiple daily dosing
– Clinical and biochemical variability
Transdermal
Testosterone patch
Testosterone gels
Androderm
Androgel
Testim
2.5 or 5 mg per day
5–10 g per day
– Rash/skin irritation common (patch)
– Transfer of medication to intimate contact (gel)
– Variable absorption
Tans-nasal gel
Natesto
4.5%
5.5 mg (1 pump from the
actuator device) applied to each
nostril (11 mg total), two times
daily, at least 6 hours apart. Total
daily dose of 22 mg
– Approved by Health Canada but currently unavailable due to
a manufacturing modification
– Potentially less suppression of spermatogenesis
Adapted from published product monographs for Androgel, Testim, Natesto, Androderm, Andriol, Delatestryl, Depo-testosterone.
CUAJ • May 2021• Volume 15, Issue 5 E239
Guideline: Testosterone deficiency in men
15. What is the recommended approach to treating a patient withnosymptoms
of TD but a “low” testosterone level?
In general, hypogonadal men who are asymptomatic with no
impact on quality of life should not be offered testosterone
therapy. Investigation and consideration of treatment should
be initiated in men with unexplained anemia or sarcopenia,
chronic use of glucocorticoid or opioid therapy, as well as
patients with HIV experiencing weight loss, irrespective of
the presence of other symptoms of TD5,7 (moderate LE, weak
recommendation).
16. What is the likelihood that my patient will respond/benefit from
treatment?
Clinical response rates may vary according to several factors,
including baseline level of testosterone, the choice of testosterone therapy, dosage, and delivery method, as well as the
nature and severity of each individual patient’s symptoms.
Overall, testosterone therapy has been shown to effectively
normalize serum testosterone concentrations in the majority (>90%) of treated men.29,32 Due to the varied clinical
spectrum associated with TD and the limitations associated
with objective measurement of symptoms, at present, there
is insufficient data to specifically quantify what proportion
of hypogonadal men overall will respond symptomatically to
treatment, and if any specific characteristics make a patient
more likely to benefit.6
 As such, practitioners are encouraged
to concurrently monitor both patient-specific symptomatic
responses from baseline, as well as changes in serum testosterone levels while on treatment. Patients with a favorable
biochemical and symptomatic response to treatment should
continue with therapy. An alternative diagnosis should be
considered in patients who fail to respond symptomatically
despite normalization of testosterone levels and an adequate
trial of therapy — approximately three months (low LE, weak
recommendation).
17. What is the best treatment approach to a patient with TD who is interested
in fertility preservation?
Many patients and clinicians are unaware that exogenous
testosterone therapy can serve as a contraceptive and result
in depressed sperm production, leading to male infertility.33,34
A recent survey of urologists found that roughly 25% would
treat infertile males with testosterone while they pursued a
pregnancy.34 Exogenous testosterone administration results
in negative feedback (mainly via testosterone converted to
estradiol) to the pituitary, leading to suppression of the primary signals for sperm (FSH) and testosterone (LH) production at the testicular level (Fig. 1).17 Hypogonadal patients
who are interested in fertility preservation should be cautioned against the isolated use of exogenous testosterone and
instead pursue treatments that increase endogenous serum
testosterone production (high LE, strong recommendation).
Human chorionic gonadotropin (HCG), selective estrogen
receptor modulators (SERMs: clomiphene, tamoxifen), and
aromatase inhibitors (AIs: anastrozole, letrozole, testolactone) are alternative treatment options (off-label) to increase
endogenous serum testosterone levels without threatening
fertility potential.5,6,33,35,36
As a unique, short-acting formulation — testosterone
nasal gel (Natesto®) — may result in less suppression of
gonadotropins (LH/FSH) and semen parameters and may represent a treatment option for symptomatic hypogonadal men
who desire to maintain fertility potential.37,38 Consultation
with a male fertility specialist is recommended.
18. What is the suggested level of testosteroneto achieve while ontreatment?
Treating physicians should aim to prescribe the minimal
required dosing to improve serum testosterone and hypogonadal symptoms. Recognizing the variations in normal ranges
among the various laboratories throughout Canada, the
current recommendations are to target correction of serum
levels to the mid-normal reference range (total testosterone
14–17 nmol/L) (low LE, weak recommendation).5,39. Patients
without significant symptomatic improvement and serum
testosterone levels measured below the mid-normal range
can be considered for dose escalation to improve clinical
efficacy. Clinical experience supports raising testosterone
into the upper third of the normal range for patients who
do not respond symptomatically at lower levels.6
 Patients
with satisfactory resolution of their symptoms, but serum
testosterone below the recommended target range typically
do not require dose adjustment.28 Dose reductions should
be prescribed in patients with serum testosterone concentrations consistently measuring above the normal range while
on treatment.
19. What is the evidence for herbal or natural testosterone “boosters” in
treating TD?
Current evidence-based reviews of the most common ingredients in testosterone boosters (T-boosters) on the market have
found minimal to no evidence demonstrating their efficacy.40
Many of the ingredients within such compounds have never
been tested for safety and/or efficacy in human trials. Among
human trials, only 30% demonstrated an improvement in
testosterone levels, 2% resulted in a decrease in testosterone,
and 68% had either an indeterminant effect or no effect at
all on testosterone levels.41 Concerningly, several case studies have demonstrated severe adverse events from T-boosters
that contain banned/illicit substances, including steroids.42,43
Currently, T-boosters cannot be recommended by health
practitioners and patients should be cautioned regarding the
unknown efficacy and safety of T-boosters, along with the possibility for severe adverse events. Regulated, evidence-based
treatments should be offered as an alternative in symptomatic
hypogonadal men (moderate LE, strong recommendation).
E240 CUAJ • May 2021• Volume 15, Issue 5
Grober et al
20. Aside from testosterone, are there other treatments that can be used
to treat TD?
Like other chronic conditions, lifestyle modification may
have a role in managing TD (low LE, weak recommendation). A bidirectional relationship between obesity and testosterone levels has been demonstrated. Mechanistically,
obesity lowers testosterone levels due to reductions in LH
release and greater aromatization of testosterone to estradiol
within adipose tissue.44,45 Weight loss, dietary restriction,
and bariatric surgery all have been shown to significantly
increase serum testosterone levels.46,47 Exercise, including
resistance training, has been shown to result in relatively
modest increases in serum testosterone levels.48,49 Finally,
sleep patterns have shown to influence testosterone concentrations, with persistent sleep deprivation/restriction lowering
testosterone levels by approximately 10–15%.50,51 A commitment to a structured sleep program may negate the impact of
limited sleep on testosterone concentrations. Some selective
symptoms of TD can be managed with symptom-specific
treatments (i.e., phosphodiesterase type 5 [PDE5] inhibitor
for ED).52
Treatment risks
21. Does testosterone replacement therapy increase the risk of prostate
cancer?
Despite historical teachings about the relationship between
testosterone on prostate cancer biology and risk, there is
now consistent evidence that testosterone therapy does
not increase a man’s risk for developing prostate cancer. In
the largest randomized controlled trial (RCT) to date (The
Testosterone Trials), involving 790 men 65 years and older
treated for 12 months with either testosterone gel or placebo,
despite close surveillance, only one man developed prostate cancer during the course of the study.29 Supporting such
observations, a meta-analysis of 22 RCTs involving 2351 men
revealed no greater risk of developing prostate cancer among
those who received testosterone therapy compared with those
who received placebo.53 There is no association between the
risk prostate cancer and serum testosterone concentrations.
Men with the highest naturally occurring (endogenous) testosterone levels do not exhibit significantly higher prostatespecific antigen (PSA) levels or a greater subsequent risk of
developing prostate cancer than men with the lowest levels
of endogenous testosterone.54,55 Finally, the evolving literature
suggests that among appropriately selected hypogonadal men
with prostate cancer managed with active surveillance, radical prostatectomy, or radiation therapy, testosterone therapy
does not appear to significantly increase the risk of biochemical (PSA) progression, local or metastatic progression, overall
mortality, and cancer-specific mortality.56-58
Symptomatic men with TD who have been diagnosed
with localized prostate cancer and treated (surgery, radiation) or followed with active surveillance without evidence
of active disease can be considered for a medically supervised trial of testosterone therapy (low LE, weak recommendation). Consultation with a urologist is recommended.
Patients with metastatic or high-risk prostate cancer who
are likely to require androgen deprivation therapy should
not be offered testosterone therapy (moderate LE, strong
recommendation).5
22. Does testosterone replacement therapy increase the risk of benign
prostatic hyperplasia (BPH) progression and lower urinary tract symptom
(LUTS)?
A collective review of the contemporary evidence to date
suggests that testosterone therapy does not increase the risk
of urinary symptoms due to BPH.59-61 Consistent with previous meta-analyses, in the Testosterone Trials — the largest
RCT to date, involving 790 men aged 65 years and older — a
similar rate of worsening urinary symptoms, suggestive of
BPH, were noted over the one-year study period for those
who received testosterone therapy compared with those
who received placebo.29 Moreover, in a review of 16 RTCs
involving 1030 men, testosterone therapy had no significant
impact on prostate volume.61 Several studies have demonstrated improvement in urinary symptoms, peak urinary flow
rates, and voided volumes with the initiation of testosterone
treatment in hypogonadal men, which is theoretically related
to its impact on muscular (bladder detrusor) function.59,60,62,63
While individual responses to any treatment, including testosterone, vary, evidence suggests that testosterone
therapy does not generally increase the risk of worsening
voiding symptoms. As such, testosterone therapy can safely
be administered to men with BPH and LUTS (moderate LE,
weak recommendation).
23. Does testosterone replacement therapy increase the risk of cardiovascular
disease?
Evidence suggests that low endogenous (natural) levels of
testosterone are associated with increased cardiovascular
risk, including higher rates of obesity, diabetes, dyslipidemia,
and metabolic syndrome, and demonstrates an increased
risk of cardiovascular death.64-66
The published literature on the impact of testosterone
therapy on cardiovascular risk is conflicting and continues
to evolve. Prior to 2010, most studies and large meta-analyses
suggested cardiovascular benefits among hypogonadal men
initiated on testosterone therapy, including improved lean
muscle mass, deceased total body fat and waist circumference, improved glycemic control (hemoglobin A1C levels),
decreased cardiovascular events, and decreased mortality.67-69
 Following 2010, a series of high-impact publications
raised concerns regarding the use of testosterone therapy
and an increased risk of cardiovascular events, including
myocardial infarction, stroke, and death.70,71 Despite sig-
CUAJ • May 2021• Volume 15, Issue 5 E241
Guideline: Testosterone deficiency in men
nificant methodological concerns with study design and
reporting, in 2014 the Food and Drug Administration (FDA)
and Health Canada released warnings regarding the use of
testosterone therapy and the possible risk of cardiovascular
events.72,73 These warning garnered significant media and
medical attention.
To date, there are no large, long-term, placebo-controlled
trials to help make definitive statements on testosterone therapy and cardiovascular risk. The literature available suggests
that untreated testosterone-deficient men are at increased
risk of heart disease, cardiovascular events, and death.64-66
Based on the best-available evidence, symptomatic hypogonadal men with stable cardiovascular disease remain
candidates for a medically supervised trial of testosterone
therapy.5 An individualized risk-benefit assessment is prudent (low LE, weak recommendation).
24. What are the contraindications to testosterone therapy?
Contraindications to testosterone therapy include:5-8,11
- Allergy or hypersensitivity to prescribed treatment
- Known or suspected male breast cancer
- Patients who desire fertility preservation (refer to
Question #17)
- Patients with metastatic or high-risk prostate cancer
who are likely to require androgen deprivation therapy
- Patients with unstable cardiovascular disease
Monitoring
25. What monitoring is required for a patient receiving testosterone therapy?
After initiating testosterone therapy, patients should have
regular monitoring for response to treatment and adverse
events. Table 4 summarizes an evidence-based monitoring
schedule for patients on testosterone therapy. 5-7,9
Adjustments to treatment dose and delivery can be made
based on patient response, adverse events, and bloodwork
results. Testosterone levels (± gonadotropins) should be measured to determine adherence and absorption of treatment
(moderate LE, strong recommendation).5,6 The recommended timing of testosterone measurement relative to the last
treatment dose will vary depending on the testosterone formulation (i.e., mid-cycle for injectables) and patients should
be counselled appropriately to ensure accurate interpretation
of results and response to treatment.
A patient’s hematocrit should be followed to ensure they
are not developing polycythemia. Polycythemia is a common side effect of testosterone therapy and may be associated with thromboembolic events (moderate LE, strong
recommendation).
69,74 Management strategies for persistent
treatment-induced polycythemia (hematocrit levels 55% or
greater) may include a dose reduction of testosterone (concentration or application frequency), drug holiday, formulation change, or blood donation/phlebotomy.
PSA testing and DRE should be performed to monitor
prostate health in accordance with the evidence-based
guidelines for prostate cancer screening (low LE, weak recommendation).75 The CUA guideline on prostate cancer
screening and early diagnosis of prostate cancer can serve as
a reference in terms of the management of PSA kinetics for
men treated with testosterone therapy.75 While discontinuation of testosterone therapy may be advised while investigating a PSA elevation, significant increases in PSA while on
testosterone therapy should not be attributed to the use of
testosterone alone and should be investigated irrespective
of the use or discontinuation testosterone therapy.
26. What is a reasonable timeline to begin to observe improvements in the
signs and symptoms of TD?
Following the initiation of testosterone therapy, serum concentrations of testosterone are known to correct earlier than
the symptomatic, structural, and metabolic signs associated
with TD.76,77 As such, patients should be counselled that
symptom response will not be immediate. Expectations for
treatment response should be established with each patient.
Patients can anticipate improvements in many of the common symptoms of TD (libido, energy levels, sexual function)
after three months of treatment or longer. Metabolic and
structural (body composition, muscle mass, bone density)
changes may take upwards of six months.77 In addition,
patients should be counselled that diet and exercise, in
combination with testosterone therapy, are recommended
for body composition changes.
Appreciating this pattern of response to testosterone therapy is fundamental when determining the impact of treatment
and the appropriate timing of followup evaluations while
on therapy. For example, if patients undergo a symptom
review and measurement of testosterone levels too early
(<3 months), it may lead both physicians and patients to
conclude that the treatment has not been impactful (i.e.,
normal levels of testosterone without symptomatic/structural/
metabolic benefit). However, if the same assessment was
scheduled 3–6 months after the initiation of therapy, the
clinical response tends to be more reflective of normalized
levels of serum testosterone.
Table 4. Testosterone therapy monitoring schedule
Baseline 3
months
6
months
Yearly
Symptom evaluation X X X X
Adverse event monitoring X X X
Serum testosterone X X X X
Hematocrit X X X
Prostate-specific antigen
(PSA)
X X X X
Digital rectal examination
(DRE)
X X
E242 CUAJ • May 2021• Volume 15, Issue 5
Grober et al
27. How and when should testosterone therapy be discontinued?
For most men, the initiation of testosterone therapy is discretionary and is based on the nature of their signs and symptoms, their degree of disability, and impact on quality of life.
Testosterone therapy should be discontinued if significant
adverse events or contraindications to treatment arise or if
there is no clinical improvement despite normalization of
serum testosterone levels after an adequate therapeutic trial
(approximately three months).5
 There is no need for tapered
dose titration when discontinuing of testosterone therapy
(high LE, strong recommendation).
Summary
Testosterone deficiency is common among Canadian men
and is associated with significant health conditions that
negatively impact quality of life. Based on a national needs
assessment of Canadian physicians, the diagnosis, management, and risks associated with TD were identified as areas
in need of educational tools and standard-setting to enhance
the quality of clinical practice. The current guideline is
offered as a practical, user-friendly, evidence-based reference to support healthcare providers and ensure that men
in need of testosterone therapy are diagnosed and treated
effectively and safely.
Competing interests: Dr. Grober has received research and educational support from Boston Scientific;
is an investor in MHB Labs; and has been a speaker and consultant for Paladin Labs. Dr. Karkowsky
has been a consultant for Felix and Paladin Labs; a speaker for Pfizer; and has received research
support from Boston Scientific. Dr. Khera has been a consultant for AbbVie, Acerus, Boston Scientific,
Clarus, and Metuchen. Dr. Holmes has been a consultant for Dian Diagnostics; has received research
support from SCIEX; and has received honoraria from the American Association for Clinical Chemistry
and MSACL.org. Dr. Lee has been a speaker for Acerus, Astellas, Paladin, and Pfizer; and an advisory board member for Acerus and Paladin. Dr. Patel has been a consultant for Boston Scientific
and Nestle Health; has received honoraria from Boston Scientific, and Paladin; and has received
an investigator-initiated grant from Coloplast. Dr. Carrier has been an advisory board member for
Paladin; a speaker for Acerus, Coloplast, Endo, and Paladin; has received research grants from and
participated in clinical trials supported by SMSNA/Boston Scientific and Urotronic; and has been
a proctor for Red Leaf Canada. Dr. Morgentaler has been a consultant for Acerus and Marius; has
received speaker honoraria from Bayer; and has received research support from Endo. The remaining
authors report no competing personal or financial interests related to this work.
Prior to publication, this guideline was reviewed and approved by the CUA Guidelines Committee,
CUA members at large, and the CUA Board.AGE Milestone (in years) 18y 20y 35y 40y 45y 50y 60y 65y 69y 80y
EXAMPLE - SECTION TITLE
Example - Checklist Item
Recommended for Normal Risk Recommended for Increased Risk
How to Use:
PLEASE READ ALL INSTRUCTIONS BEFORE INTERPRETING THE COLOR
GRAPH.
For each AGE Milestone as listed, if the patient is at least this AGE, consider the
applicable checklist items.
The checklist items are applicable to an individual based on their AGE and RISK.
The criteria for INCREASED RISK FACTORS are defined in the COMMENTS section
located below the color graph.
The COMMENTS and REFERENCES sections will have information on the frequency
of any particular screening test when applicable.
Items that are not shaded (white) are simply those without specific
recommendations. There are no recommendations against any particular item.
Shared decision between the clinician and the patient is always recommended for
testing decisions.
Effective as of 9/18/2023.
ASMH/SMSNA Men’s Health Checklist
AGE Milestone (in years) 18y 20y 35y 40y 45y 50y 60y 65y 69y 80y
SCREENING RECOMMENDATIONS
Hypertension
Tobacco Use and Cessation
Obesity
Unhealthy Drug Use
Alcohol misuse
Depression
  Anxiety
  Suicide
HIV infection
Hepatitis C virus infection
Sleep apnea
Polypharmacy
Voiding health
Sexual health
Erectile dysfunction
Testicular cancer
Penile cancer
Skin cancer screening
Body dysmorphic disorder
  Muscle dysmorphia/”Bigorexia”
Social determinants of health
Hepatitis B virus infection
Syphilis
Chlamydia and gonorrhea
Tuberculosis (TB)
Testosterone deficiency
AGE Milestone (in years) 18y 20y 35y 40y 45y 50y 60y 65y 69y 80y
MEN’S HEALTH
AMERICAN SOCIETY FOR
The checklist items are applicable to an individual patient based on their age and risk (either Normal Risk or
Increased Risk). For each AGE Milestone as listed, if the patient is at least this AGE, consider the following
checklist items. Note, the AGE Milestones are NOT the frequency of any particular screening test. SEE
COMMENTS for each specific item recommendation.
Recommended for Normal Risk Recommended for Increased Risk
Recommended for Normal Risk Recommended for Increased Risk
PREVENTATIVE MEDICATIONS RECOMMENDATIONS
Preexposure prohylaxis (PreP) for HIV
Statin for CVD prevention
Aspirin for cardiovascular risks
Fall prevention (vitamin D)
VACCINE RECOMMENDATIONS
Influenza
Tetanus
COVID
Hepatitis A (if not done in childhood)
Hepatitis B (start at 19)
Pneumococcal
Shingles
Monkeypox
HPV
COUNSELING RECOMMENDATIONS
Sexually transmitted infection prevention
Diet for CVD prevention
Activity for CVD prevention
Skin cancer prevention
Sleep health
Sexual health
Contraceptive counselling
Accidental injury
Fall prevention
AGE Milestone (in years) 18y 20y 35y 40y 45y 50y 60y 65y 69y 80y
AGE Milestone (in years) 18y 20y 35y 40y 45y 50y 60y 65y 69y 80y
SCREENING RECOMMENDATIONS (con’t.) *See comments
Lipid disorder *
Abnormal glucose/diabetes * *
BRCA gene screening
Prostate cancer
Colorectal cancer
Lung cancer
Osteoporosis
Bladder cancer
Kidney cancer
Abdominal aortic aneurysm
Fertility screening
Recommended for Normal Risk Recommended for Increased Risk
Recommended for Normal Risk Recommended for Increased Risk
AGE Milestone (in years) 18y 20y 35y 40y 45y 50y 60y 65y 69y 80y
ADDITIONAL COMMENTS
Potential dangers of OTC/supplements/stimulants
Male Hygiene
Penile Disorders (phimosis, Peyronie’s Disease, etc.)
Thyroid Function
Transgender men
  Annual STI/cancer screening if cervix present
Transgender women (prostate cancer screening)
AGE Milestone (in years) 18y 20y 35y 40y 45y 50y 60y 65y 69y 80y