Hypogonadism | Conditions | UCSF Health
Skip to Main Content
Looks like you’re visiting UCSF Health on Internet Explorer. For the best experience, try
Chrome
or
Firefox
.
Popular Searches
Find a Doctor
Refer a Patient
Clinics
Conditions
Treatments
Locations & Directions
University of California San Francisco
Conditions & Treatments
Conditions & Treatments
EPILEPSY BREAKTHROUGH
Stopping Seizures Before They Start
Find Conditions
Find Treatments
Clinical Trials
Patient Education
Medical Tests
Doctors
Doctors
MEET OUR DOCTORS
Dr. Jasleen Kukreja and the Life-Saving Gift of Breath
Find a Doctor
Doctor Stories
Get a Second Opinion
Clinics & Locations
Clinics & Locations
BAKAR PRECISION CANCER MEDICINE BUILDING
Care, Convenience and Support at New Cancer Facility
Find a Clinic
Locations & Directions
Urgent Care
Emergency Care
Partners & Affiliates
UCSF Benioff Children's Hospitals
Patients & Visitors
Patients & Visitors
KNOW BEFORE YOU GO
10 Ways to Get the Most Out of Your Doctor’s Visit
Your Hospital Stay
For Visitors
International Services
For Caregivers
Support, Services & Groups
Billing & Insurance
Help Paying Your Bill
Pricing Transparency
340B Drug Pricing Program
Medical Records
Patient Relations
Why Choose Us?
Why Choose Us?
U.S. News Best Hospital Rankings
UCSF Health Ranked Among Nation's Top 10 Hospitals
Our Mission
Quality of Patient Care
Patient Stories
Embracing Diversity
Our Leadership
Refer a Patient
MyChart
Request Appointment
Get a Second Opinion
Call us: (888) 689-8273
University of California San Francisco
Endocrinology
Hypogonadism
Overview
Signs & symptoms
Diagnosis
Treatments
Where to get care
Helpful resources
Support services
Overview
Hypogonadism is a condition that causes decreased function of the gonads, which are the testes in males and the ovaries in females, and decreased production of sex hormones. You may be born with the condition or it can develop later in life from injury or infection. Some types of hypogonadism can be treated with hormone replacement therapy.
There are two forms of the condition – primary hypogonadism resulting from problems of the testis or ovary and central hypogonadism caused by problems with the pituitary or hypothalamic glands. Central hypogonadism leads to decreased levels of luteinizing hormone (LH) and follicle stimulating hormones (FSH), released by the pituitary gland.
The condition may have genetic, menopausal, autoimmune and viral causes, or may develop after cancer treatments such as radiation and chemotherapy.
Fasting, weight loss, stress and eating disorders such as anorexia nervosa and bulimia can also cause the condition.
Our approach to hypogonadism
UCSF is an international leader in endocrinology care. Our team provides comprehensive consultations, evaluations and treatments for a wide range of hormone disorders, such as hypogonadism.
In men and premenopausal women, we can usually treat hypogonadism successfully with hormone replacement therapy. We may also use hormonal treatments to restore fertility.
Pituitary tumors cause some cases of hypogonadism, and treatment involves removing the tumor. UCSF surgeons pioneered a minimally invasive procedure to remove pituitary tumors, called the transsphenoidal approach, which is safer than traditional surgery and leaves no scars. UCSF has more experience with this procedure than any other program in the nation and has a record of excellent outcomes.
Awards & recognition
Among the top hospitals in the nation
One of the nation’s best for diabetes care & endocrinology
Signs & symptoms
In children who have not reached puberty, hypogonadism causes no symptoms. In adolescents, it can delay or prevent sexual development.
Adult women with the condition may stop menstruating or develop infertility, loss of libido, vaginal dryness and hot flashes. Prolonged periods of hypogonadism can cause osteoporosis.
Men with the condition may experience loss of libido, erectile dysfunction, hot flashes, breast growth and infertility.
Diagnosis
To diagnose hypogonadism, tests may be performed to check hormone levels –  estogren in females and testosterone in males. In addition, levels of luteinizing hormone (LH) and follicle stimulating hormones (FSH) will be tested. LH and FSH are pituitary hormones that are stimulated by the gonads.
Other tests may measure thyroid hormones, sperm count and prolactin, a hormone released by the pituitary gland that stimulates breast development and milk production Tests also may be performed to test for anemia and possible genetic causes of symptoms.
For women, your doctor may request a sonogram of your ovaries.
If pituitary disease is suspected, a magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan or computed tomography (CT) scan may be performed to examine the the pituitary gland.
Treatments
Hormone replacement therapy has proven to be effective treatment for hypogonadism in men and pre-menopausal women.
Estrogen may be administered in the form of a patch or pill. Testosterone can be given by a patch, a product soaked in by the gums, a gel or by injection.
For women who have not had their uterus removed, a combination of estrogen and progesterone is often recommended to decrease the chance of developing endometrial cancer. Low-dose testosterone may be added for women with hypogonadism who have a low sex drive.
Other hormones may be prescribed to restore fertility in men and women.
If the condition is caused by a pituitary tumor, treatment will include surgery to remove the tumor.
UCSF Health medical specialists have reviewed this information. It is for educational purposes only and is not intended to replace the advice of your doctor or other health care provider. We encourage you to discuss any questions or concerns you may have with your provider.
Where to get care
(3)
Helpful resources
California Center for Pituitary Disorders
UCSF Endocrinology and Metabolism
Related conditions
Pituitary tumors
Support services
Patient Resource
Case Management & Social Work
Connect with a team that can help you find resources, solve problems and advocate for you during treatment at UCSF.
Class
Mindfulness-Based Stress Reduction Class
This eight-week class teaches mindfulness practices that can reduce stress and improve your overall health, such as meditation and body awareness.
Patient Resource
Patient Relations
We welcome feedback about your experience at UCSF Health. Find out how to contact us with comments, questions or concerns.
Patient Resource
Spiritual Care Services
Chaplains representing many faiths are available around the clock to provide support, comfort and counsel to patients, families and caregivers.
Did you know?
In 2019, UCSF surgeons implanted a new type of device that allowed a blind patient to see light and shapes. When this tiny implant receives signals from special video glasses worn by patients, it stimulates the eye's optic transmitters. UCSF is one of just a few hospitals in the U.S. that offer this procedure.
Learn more
Follow UCSF Health:
Getting Care
Find a Doctor
Emergency Care
Primary Care
All Medical Services
International Services
Price Transparency
Help Paying Your Bill
Getting Involved
Donate
Volunteer
Join Our Team
About Us
Locations & Directions
Contact Us
Contact Patient Relations
Media Resources
Accessibility Resources
Report Misconduct
Website Privacy Policy
Quality of Patient Care
Crisis Standards of Care
Our Organization
UCSF News
Notice of Privacy Practices
Research and Education
Clinical Trials
UC San Francisco
UCSF School of Medicine
UCSF School of Nursing
UCSF School of Pharmacy
Referring Physicians
Refer a Patient
Transfer a Patient
MDLink
Request a Consultation
Physician Channel
Follow UCSF Health:
© 2002 -
2025
.
The Regents of The University of California.
Privacy Policy
Terms and Conditions
Some stock photos, posed by model.
Share
Email Link
Copy Link
Share on Facebook
Share on LinkedIn
Share on X